1. Never Talk to Strangers

At the sunset hour of one warm spring day two men were to be seen at
Patriarch's Ponds. The first of them--aged about forty, dressed in a greyish
summer suit--was short, dark-haired, well-fed and bald. He carried his
decorous pork-pie hat by the brim and his neatly shaven face was embellished
by black hornrimmed spectacles of preternatural dimensions. The other, a
broad-shouldered young man with curly reddish hair and a check cap pushed
back to the nape of his neck, was wearing a tartan shirt, chewed white
trousers and black sneakers.
The first was none other than Mikhail Alexandrovich Berlioz, editor of
a highbrow literary magazine and chairman of the management cofnmittee of
one of the biggest Moscow literary clubs, known by its abbreviation as
massolit; his young companion was the poet Ivan Nikolayich Poniryov who
wrote under the pseudonym of Bezdomny.
Reaching the shade of the budding lime trees, the two writers went
straight to a gaily-painted kiosk labelled'Beer and Minerals'.
There was an oddness about that terrible day in May which is worth
recording : not only at the kiosk but along the whole avenue parallel to
Malaya Bronnaya Street there was not a person to be seen. It was the hour of
the day when people feel too exhausted to breathe, when Moscow glows in a
dry haze as the sun disappears behind the Sadovaya Boulevard--yet no one had
come out for a walk under the limes, no one was sitting on a bench, the
avenue was empty.
'A glass of lemonade, please,'said Berlioz.
'There isn't any,'replied the woman in the kiosk. For some reason the
request seemed to offend her.
'Got any beer?' enquired Bezdomny in a hoarse voice.
'Beer's being delivered later this evening' said the woman.
'Well what have you got?' asked Berlioz.
'Apricot juice, only it's warm' was the answer.
'All right, let's have some.'
The apricot juice produced a rich yellow froth, making the air smell
like a hairdresser's. After drinking it the two writers immediately began to
hiccup. They paid and sat down on a bench facing the pond, their backs to
Bronnaya Street.Then occurred the second oddness, which affected Berlioz
alone. He suddenly stopped hiccuping, his heart thumped and for a moment
vanished, then returned but with a blunt needle sticking into it. In
addition Berlioz was seized by a fear that was groundless but so powerful
that he had an immediate impulse to run away from Patriarch's Ponds without
looking back.
Berlioz gazed miserably about him, unable to say what had frightened
him. He went pale, wiped his forehead with his handkerchief and thought: '
What's the matter with me? This has never happened before. Heart playing
tricks . . . I'm overstrained ... I think it's time to chuck everything up
and go and take the waters at Kislovodsk. . . .'
Just then the sultry air coagulated and wove itself into the shape of a
man--a transparent man of the strangest appearance. On his small head was a
jockey-cap and he wore a short check bum-freezer made of air. The man was
seven feet tall but narrow in the shoulders, incredibly thin and with a face
made for derision.
Berlioz's life was so arranged that he was not accustomed to seeing
unusual phenomena. Paling even more, he stared and thought in consternation
: ' It can't be!'
But alas it was, and the tall, transparent gentleman was swaying from
left to right in front of him without touching the ground.
Berlioz was so overcome with horror that he shut his eyes. When he
opened them he saw that it was all over, the mirage had dissolved, the
chequered figure had vanished and the blunt needle had simultaneously

removed itself from his heart.
'The devil! ' exclaimed the editor. ' D'you know, Ivan, the heat
nearly gave me a stroke just then! I even saw something like a hallucination
. . . ' He tried to smile but his eyes were still blinking with fear and his
hands trembled. However he gradually calmed down, flapped his handkerchief
and with a brave enough ' Well, now. . . ' carried on the conversation that
had been interrupted by their drink of apricot juice.
They had been talking, it seemed, about Jesus Christ. The fact was that
the editor had commissioned the poet to write a long anti-religious poem for
one of the regular issues of his magazine. Ivan Nikolayich had written this
poem in record time, but unfortunately the editor did not care for it at
all. Bezdomny had drawn the chief figure in his poem, Jesus, in very black
colours, yet in the editor's opinion the whole poem had to be written again.
And now he was reading Bezdomny a lecture on Jesus in order to stress the
poet's fundamental error.
It was hard to say exactly what had made Bezdomny write as he
had--whether it was his great talent for graphic description or complete
ignorance of the subject he was writing on, but his Jesus had come out,
well, completely alive, a Jesus who had really existed, although admittedly
a Jesus who had every possible fault.
Berlioz however wanted to prove to the poet that the main object was
not who Jesus was, whether he was bad or good, but that as a person Jesus
had never existed at all and that all the stories about him were mere
invention, pure myth.
The editor was a well-read man and able to make skilful reference to
the ancient historians, such as the famous Philo of Alexandria and the
brilliantly educated Josephus Flavius, neither of whom mentioned a word of
Jesus' existence. With a display of solid erudition, Mikhail Alexandrovich
informed the poet that incidentally, the passage in Chapter 44 of the
fifteenth book of Tacitus' Annals, where he describes the execution of
Jesus, was nothing but a later forgery.
The poet, for whom everything the editor was saying was a novelty,
listened attentively to Mikhail Alexandrovich, fixing him with his bold
green eyes, occasionally hiccuping and cursing the apricot juice under his
breath.
'There is not one oriental religion,' said Berlioz, ' in which an
immaculate virgin does not bring a god into the world. And the Christians,
lacking any originality, invented their Jesus in exactly the same way. In
fact he never lived at all. That's where the stress has got to lie.
Berlioz's high tenor resounded along the empty avenue and as Mikhail
Alexandrovich picked his way round the sort of historical pitfalls that can
only be negotiated safely by a highly educated man, the poet learned more
and more useful and instructive facts about the Egyptian god Osiris, son of
Earth and Heaven, about the Phoenician god Thammuz, about Marduk and even
about the fierce little-known god Vitzli-Putzli, who had once been held in
great veneration by the Aztecs of Mexico. At the very moment when Mikhail
Alexandrovich was telling the poet how the Aztecs used to model figurines of
Vitzli-Putzli out of dough-- the first man appeared in the avenue.
Afterwards, when it was frankly too late, various bodies collected
their data and issued descriptions of this man. As to his teeth, he haid
platinum crowns on his left side and gold ones on his tight. He wore an
expensive grey suit and foreign shoes of the same colour as his suit. His
grey beret was stuck jauntily over one ear and under his arm he carried a
walking-stick with a knob in the shape of a poodle's head. He looked
slightly over forty. Crooked sort of mouth. Clean-shav-n. Dark hair. Right
eye black, left ieye for some reason green. Eyebrows black, but one higher
than the other. In short--a foreigner.
As he passed the bench occupied by the editor and the poet, the
foreigner gave them a sidelong glance, stopped and suddenly sat down on the
next bench a couple of paces away from the two friends.
'A German,'' thought Berlioz. ' An Englishman. ...' thought Bezdomny.
' Phew, he must be hot in those gloves!'
The stranger glanced round the tall houses that formed a square round
the pond, from which it was obvious that he seeing this locality for the

first time and that it interested him. His gaze halted on the upper storeys,
whose panes threw back a blinding, fragmented reflection of the sun which
was setting on Mikhail Alexandrovich for ever ; he then looked downwards to
where the windows were turning darker in the early evening twilight, smiled
patronisingly at something, frowned, placed his hands on the knob of his
cane and laid his chin on his hands.
'You see, Ivan,' said Berlioz,' you have written a marvellously
satirical description of the birth of Jesus, the son of God, but the whole
joke lies in the fact that there had already been a whole series of sons of
God before Jesus, such as the Phoenician Adonis, the Phrygian Attis, the
Persian Mithras. Of course not one of these ever existed, including Jesus,
and instead of the nativity or the arrival of the Magi you should have
described the absurd rumours about their arrival. But according to your
story the nativity really took place! '
Here Bezdomny made an effort to stop his torturing hiccups and held his
breath, but it only made him hiccup more loudly and painfully. At that
moment Berlioz interrupted his speech because the foreigner suddenly rose
and approached the two writers. They stared at him in astonishment.
'Excuse me, please,' said the stranger with a foreign accent, although
in correct Russian, ' for permitting myself, without an introduction . . .
but the subject of your learned conversation was so interesting that. . .'
Here he politely took off his beret and the two friends had no
alternative but to rise and bow.
'No, probably a Frenchman.. . .' thought Berlioz.
'A Pole,' thought Bezdomny.
I should add that the poet had found the stranger repulsive from first
sight, although Berlioz had liked the look of him, or rather not exactly
liked him but, well. . . been interested by him.
'May I join you? ' enquired the foreigner politely, and as the two
friends moved somewhat unwillingly aside he adroitly placed himself 'between
them and at once joined the conversation. ' If I am not mistaken, you were
saying that Jesus never existed, were you not? ' he asked, turning his green
left eye on Berlioz.
'No, you were not mistaken,' replied Berlioz courteously. ' I did
indeed say that.'
'Ah, how interesting! ' exclaimed the foreigner.
'What the hell does he want?' thought Bezdomny and frowned.
'And do you agree with your friend? ' enquired the unknown man,
turning to Bezdomny on his right.
'A hundred per cent! ' affirmed the poet, who loved to use pretentious
numerical expressions.
'Astounding! ' cried their unbidden companion. Glancing furtively
round and lowering his voice he said : ' Forgive me for being so rude, but
am I right in thinking that you do not believe in God either? ' He gave a
horrified look and said: ' I swear not to tell anyone! '
'Yes, neither of us believes in God,' answered Berlioz with a faint
smile at this foreign tourist's apprehension. ' But we can talk about it
with absolute freedom.'
The foreigner leaned against the backrest of the bench and asked, in a
voice positively squeaking with curiosity :
'Are you . . . atheists? '
'Yes, we're atheists,' replied Berlioz, smiling, and Bezdomny thought
angrily : ' Trying to pick an argument, damn foreigner! '
'Oh, how delightful!' exclaimed the astonishing foreigner and swivelled
his head from side to side, staring at each of them in turn.
'In our country there's nothing surprising about atheism,' said
Berlioz with diplomatic politeness. ' Most of us have long ago and quite
consciously given up believing in all those fairy-tales about God.'
At this the foreigner did an extraordinary thing--he stood up and shook
the astonished editor by the hand, saying as he did so :
'Allow me to thank you with all my heart!'
'What are you thanking him for? ' asked Bezdomny, blinking.
'For some very valuable information, which as a traveller I find
extremely interesting,' said the eccentric foreigner, raising his forefinger

meaningfully.
This valuable piece of information had obviously made a powerful
impression on the traveller, as he gave a frightened glance at the houses as
though afraid of seeing an atheist at every window.
'No, he's not an Englishman,' thought Berlioz. Bezdomny thought: '
What I'd like to know is--where did he manage to pick up such good Russian?
' and frowned again.
'But might I enquire,' began the visitor from abroad after some
worried reflection, ' how you account for the proofs of the existence of
God, of which there are, as you know, five? '
'Alas! ' replied Berlioz regretfully. ' Not one of these proofs is
valid, and mankind has long since relegated them to the archives. You must
agree that rationally there can be no proof of the existence of God.'
'Bravo!' exclaimed the stranger. ' Bravo! You have exactly repeated
the views of the immortal Emmanuel on that subject. But here's the oddity of
it: he completely demolished all five proofs and then, as though to deride
his own efforts, he formulated a sixth proof of his own.'
'Kant's proof,' objected the learned editor with a thin smile, ' is
also unconvincing. Not for nothing did Schiller say that Kant's reasoning on
this question would only satisfy slaves, and Strauss simply laughed at his
proof.'
As Berlioz spoke he thought to himself: ' But who on earth is he? And
how does he speak such good Russian? '
'Kant ought to be arrested and given three years in Solovki asylum for
that " proof " of his! ' Ivan Nikolayich burst out completely unexpectedly.
'Ivan!' whispered Berlioz, embarrassed.
But the suggestion to pack Kant off to an asylum not only did not
surprise the stranger but actually delighted him. ' Exactly, exactly! ' he
cried and his green left eye, turned on Berlioz glittered. ' That's exactly
the place for him! I said to him myself that morning at breakfast: " If
you'll forgive me, professor, your theory is no good. It may be clever but
it's horribly incomprehensible. People will think you're mad." '
Berlioz's eyes bulged. ' At breakfast ... to Kant? What is he rambling
about? ' he thought.
'But,' went on the foreigner, unperturbed by Berlioz's amazement and
turning to the poet, ' sending him to Solovki is out of the question,
because for over a hundred years now he has been somewhere far away from
Solovki and I assure you that it is totally impossible to bring him back.'
'What a pity!' said the impetuous poet.
'It is a pity,' agreed the unknown man with a glint in his eye, and
went on: ' But this is the question that disturbs me--if there is no God,
then who, one wonders, rules the life of man and keeps the world in order? '
'Man rules himself,' said Bezdomny angrily in answer to such an
obviously absurd question.
'I beg your pardon,' retorted the stranger quietly,' but to rule one
must have a precise plan worked out for some reasonable period ahead. Allow
me to enquire how man can control his own affairs when he is not only
incapable of compiling a plan for some laughably short term, such as, say, a
thousand years, but cannot even predict what will happen to him tomorrow? '
'In fact,' here the stranger turned to Berlioz, ' imagine what would
happen if you, for instance, were to start organising others and yourself,
and you developed a taste for it--then suddenly you got. . . he, he ... a
slight heart attack . . . ' at this the foreigner smiled sweetly, as though
the thought of a heart attack gave him pleasure. . . . ' Yes, a heart
attack,' he repeated the word sonorously, grinning like a cat, ' and that's
the end of you as an organiser! No one's fate except your own interests you
any longer. Your relations start lying to you. Sensing that something is
amiss you rush to a specialist, then to a charlatan, and even perhaps to a
fortune-teller. Each of them is as useless as the other, as you know
perfectly well. And it all ends in tragedy: the man who thought he was in
charge is suddenly reduced to lying prone and motionless in a wooden box and
his fellow men, realising that there is no more sense to be had of him,
incinerate him.
'Sometimes it can be even worse : a man decides to go to

Kislovodsk,'--here the stranger stared at Berlioz--' a trivial matter you
may think, but he cannot because for no good reason he suddenly jumps up and
falls under a tram! You're not going to tell me that he arranged to do that
himself? Wouldn't it be nearer the truth to say that someone quite different
was directing his fate?' The stranger gave an eerie peal of laughter.
Berlioz had been following the unpleasant story about the heart attack
and the tram with great attention and some uncomfortable thoughts had begun
to worry him. ' He's not a foreigner . . . he's not a foreigner,' he
thought, ' he's a very peculiar character . . . but I ask you, who is he? .
..'
'I see you'd like to smoke,' said the stranger unexpectedly, turning
to Bezdomny, ' what sort do you prefer? '
'Do you mean you've got different sorts? ' glumly asked the poet, who
had run out of cigarettes.
'Which do you prefer? ' repeated the mysterious stranger.
'Well, then " Our Brand ",' replied Bezdomny, irritated.
The unknown man immediately pulled a cigarette case out of his pocket
and offered it to Bezdomny.
• " Our Brand " . . .'
The editor and the poet were not so much surprised by the fact that the
cigarette case actually contained ' Our Brand' as by the cigarette case
itself. It was of enormous dimensions, made of solid gold and on the inside
of the cover a triangle of diamonds flashed with blue and white fire.
Their reactions were different. Berlioz thought: ' No, he's a
foreigner.' Bezdomny thought: ' What the hell is he . . .? '
The poet and the owner of the case lit their cigarettes and Berlioz,
who did not smoke, refused.
'I shall refute his argument by saying' Berlioz decided to himself, '
that of course man is mortal, no one will argue with that. But the fact is
that . . .'
However he was not able to pronounce the words before the stranger
spoke:
'Of course man is mortal, but that's only half the problem. The trouble
is that mortality sometimes comes to him so suddenly! And he cannot even say
what he will be doing this evening.'
'What a stupid way of putting the question. ' thought Berlioz and
objected :
'Now there you exaggerate. I know more or less exactly what I'm going
to be doing this evening. Provided of course that a brick doesn't fall on my
head in the street. . .'
'A brick is neither here nor there,' the stranger interrupted
persuasively. ' A brick never falls on anyone's head. You in particular, I
assure you, are in no danger from that. Your death will be different.'
'Perhaps you know exactly how I am going to die? ' enquired Berlioz
with understandable sarcasm at the ridiculous turn that the conversation
seemed to be taking. ' Would you like to tell me?'
'Certainly,' rejoined the stranger. He looked Berlioz up and down as
though he were measuring him for a suit and muttered through his teeth
something that sounded like : ' One, two . . . Mercury in the second house .
. . the moon waning . . . six-- accident . . . evening--seven . . . ' then
announced loudly and cheerfully : ' Your 'head will be cut off!'
Bezdomny turned to the stranger with a wild, furious stare and Berlioz
asked with a sardonic grin :
'By whom? Enemies? Foreign spies? '
'No,' replied their companion, ' by a Russian woman, a member of the
Komsomol.'
'Hm,' grunted Berlioz, upset by the foreigner's little joke. ' That,
if you don'c mind my saying so, is most improbable.'
'I beg your pardon,' replied the foreigner, ' but it is so. Oh yes, I
was going to ask you--what are you doing this evening, if it's not a secret?
'
'It's no secret. From here I'm going home, and then at ten o'clock
this evening there's a meeting at the massolit and I shall be in the chair.'
'No, that is absolutely impossible,' said the stranger firmly.

'Why?'
'Because,' replied the foreigner and frowned up at the sky where,
sensing the oncoming cool of the evening, the birds were flying to roost, '
Anna has already bought the sunflower-seed oil, in fact she has not only
bought it, but has already spilled it. So that meeting will not take place.'
With this, as one might imagine, there was silence beneath the lime
trees.
'Excuse me,' said Berlioz after a pause with a glance at the
stranger's jaunty beret, ' but what on earth has sunflower-seed oil got to
do with it... and who is Anna? '
'I'll tell you what sunflower-seed oil's got to do with it,' said
Bezdomny suddenly, having obviously decided to declare war on their
uninvited companion. ' Have you, citizen, ever had to spend any time in a
mental hospital? '
'Ivan! ' hissed Mikhail Alexandrovich.
But the stranger was not in the least offended and gave a cheerful
laugh. ' Yes, I have, I have, and more than once! ' he exclaimed laughing,
though the stare that he gave the poet was mirthless. ' Where haven't I
been! My only regret is that I didn't stay long enough to ask the professor
what schizophrenia was. But you are going to find that out from him
yourself, Ivan Nikolayich!'
'How do you know my name? '
'My dear fellow, who doesn't know you? ' With this the foreigner
pulled the previous day's issue of The Literary Gazette out of his pocket
and Ivan Nikolayich saw his own picture on the front page above some of his
own verse. Suddenly what had delighted him yesterday as proof of his fame
and popularity no longer gave the poet any pleasure at all.
'I beg your pardon,' he said, his face darkening. ' Would you excuse
us for a minute? I should like a word or two with my friend.'
'Oh, with pleasure! ' exclaimed the stranger. ' It's so delightful
sitting here under the trees and I'm not in a hurry to go anywhere, as it
happens.'
'Look here, Misha,' whispered the poet when he had drawn Berlioz
aside. ' He's not just a foreign tourist, he's a spy. He's a Russian emigre
and he's trying to catch us out. Ask him for his papers and then he'll go
away . . .'
'Do you think we should? ' whispered Berlioz anxiously, thinking to
himself--' He's right, of course . . .'
'Mark my words,' the poet whispered to him. ' He's pretending to be an
idiot so that he can trap us with some compromising question. You can hear
how he speaks Russian,' said the poet, glancing sideways and watching to see
that the stranger was not eavesdropping. ' Come on, let's arrest him and
then we'll get rid of him.'
The poet led Berlioz by the arm back to the bench.
The unknown man was no longer sitting on it but standing beside it,
holding a booklet in a dark grey binding, a fat envelope made of good paper
and a visiting card.
'Forgive me, but in the heat of our argument I forgot to introduce
myself. Here is my card, my passport and a letter inviting me to come to
Moscow for consultations,' said the stranger gravely, giving both writers a
piercing stare.
The two men were embarrassed. ' Hell, he overheard us . . . ' thought
Berlioz, indicating with a polite gesture that there was no need for this
show of documents. Whilst the stranger was offering them to the editor, the
poet managed to catch sight of the visiting card. On it in foreign lettering
was the word ' Professor ' and the initial letter of a surname which began
with a'W'.
'Delighted,' muttered the editor awkwardly as the foreigner put his
papers back into his pocket. Good relations having been re-established, all
three sat down again on the bench.
'So you've been invited here as a consultant, have you, professor? '
asked Berlioz.
'Yes, I have.'
'Are you German? ' enquired Bezdomny.

'I? ' rejoined the professor and thought for a moment. ' Yes, I
suppose I am German. . . . ' he said.
'You speak excellent Russian,' remarked Bezdomny.
'Oh, I'm something of a polyglot. I know a great number of languages,'
replied the professor.
'And what is your particular field of work? ' asked Berlioz.
'I specialise in black magic.'
'Like hell you do! . . . ' thought Mikhail Alexandrovich.
'And ... and you've been invited here to give advice on that? ' he
asked with a gulp.
'Yes,' the professor assured him, and went on : ' Apparently your
National Library has unearthed some original manuscripts of the
ninth-century necromancer Herbert Aurilachs. I have been asked to decipher
them. I am the only specialist in the world.'
'Aha! So you're a historian? ' asked Berlioz in a tone of considerable
relief and respect.
' Yes, I am a historian,' adding with apparently complete
inconsequence, ' this evening a historic event is going to take place here
at Patriarch's Ponds.'
Again the editor and the poet showed signs of utter amazement, but the
professor beckoned to them and when both had bent their heads towards him he
whispered :
'Jesus did exist, you know.'
'Look, professor,' said Berlioz, with a forced smile, ' With all
respect to you as a scholar we take a different attitude on that point.'
'It's not a question of having an attitude,' replied the strange
professor. ' He existed, that's all there is to it.'
'But one must have some proof. . . . ' began Berlioz.
'There's no need for any proof,' answered the professor. In a low
voice, his foreign accent vanishing altogether, he began :
'It's very simple--early in the morning on the fourteenth of the
spring month of Nisan the Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, in a white
cloak lined with blood-red...

2. Pontius Pilate

Early in the morning on the fourteenth of the spring month of Nisan the
Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, in a white cloak lined with blood-red,
emerged with his shuffling cavalryman's walk into the arcade connecting the
two wings of the palace of Herod the Great.
More than anything else in the world the Procurator hated the smell of
attar of roses. The omens for the day were bad, as this scent had been
haunting him since dawn.
It seemed to the Procurator that the very cypresses and palms in the
garden were exuding the smell of roses, that this damned stench of roses was
even mingling with the smell of leather tackle and sweat from his mounted
bodyguard.
A haze of smoke was drifting towards the arcade across the upper
courtyard of the garden, coming from the wing at the rear of the palace, the
quarters of the first cohort of the XII Legion ; known as the ' Lightning',
it had been stationed in Jerusalem since the Procurator's arrival. The same
oily perfume of roses was mixed with the acrid smoke that showed that the
centuries' cooks had started to prepare breakfast.
'Oh gods, what are you punishing me for? . . . No, there's no doubt, I
have it again, this terrible incurable pain . . . hemicrania, when half the
head aches . . . there's no cure for it, nothing helps. ... I must try not
to move my head. . . . '
A chair had already been placed on the mosaic floor by the fountain;
without a glance round, the Procurator sat in it and stretched out his hand

to one side. His secretary deferentially laid a piece of parchment in his
hand. Unable to restrain a grimace of agony the Procurator gave a fleeting
sideways look at its contents, returned the parchment to his secretary and
said painfully:
'The accused comes from Galilee, does he? Was the case sent to the
tetrarch? '
'Yes, Procurator,' replied the secretary. ' He declined to confirm the
finding of the court and passed the Sanhedrin's sentence of death to you for
confirmation.'
The Procurator's cheek twitched and he said quietly :
'Bring in the accused.'
At once two legionaries escorted a man of about twenty-seven from the
courtyard, under the arcade and up to the balcony, where they placed him
before the Procurator's chair. The man was dressed in a shabby, torn blue
chiton. His head was covered with a white bandage fastened round his
forehead, his hands tied behind his back. There was a large bruise under the
man's left eye and a scab of dried blood in one corner of his mouth. The
prisoner stared at the Procurator with anxious curiosity.
The Procurator was silent at first, then asked quietly in Aramaic:
'So you have been inciting the people to destroy the temple of
Jerusalem? '
The Procurator sat as though carved in stone, his lips barely moving as
he pronounced the words. The Procurator was like stone from fear of shaking
his fiendishly aching head.
The man with bound hands made a slight move forwards and began
speaking:
'Good man! Believe me . . . '
But the Procurator, immobile as before and without raising his voice,
at once interrupted him :
'You call me good man? You are making a mistake. The rumour about me
in Jerusalem is that I am a raving monster and that is absolutely correct,'
and he added in the same monotone :
'Send centurion Muribellum to me.'
The balcony seemed to darken when the centurion of the first century.
Mark surnamed Muribellum, appeared before the Procurator. Muribellum was a
head taller than the tallest soldier in the legion and so broad in the
shoulders that he completely obscured the rising sun.
The Procurator said to the centurion in Latin:
'This criminal calls me " good man ". Take him away for a minute and
show him the proper way to address me. But do not mutilate him.'
All except the motionless Procurator watched Mark Muribellum as he
gestured to the prisoner to follow him. Because of his height people always
watched Muribellum wherever he went. Those who saw him for the first time
were inevitably fascinated by his disfigured face : his nose had once been
smashed by a blow from a German club.
Mark's heavy boots resounded on the mosaic, the bound man followed him
noiselessly. There was complete silence under the arcade except for the
cooing of doves in the garden below and the water singing its seductive tune
in the fountain.
The Procurator had a sudden urge to get up and put his temples under
the stream of water until they were numb. But he knew that even that would
not help.
Having led the prisoner out of the arcade into the garden, Muribellum
took a whip from the hands of a legionary standing by the plinth of a bronze
statue and with a gentle swing struck the prisoner across the shoulders. The
centurion's movement was slight, almost negligent, but the bound man
collapsed instantly as though his legs had been struck from under him and he
gasped for air. The colour fled from his face and his eyes clouded.
With only his left hand Mark lifted the fallen man into the air as
lightly as an empty sack, set him on his feet and said in broken, nasal
Aramaic:
'You call a Roman Procurator " hegemon " Don't say anything else.
Stand to attention. Do you understand or must I hit you again? '
The prisoner staggered helplessly, his colour returned, he gulped and

answered hoarsely :
'I understand you. Don't beat me.'
A minute later he was again standing in front of the Procurator. The
harsh, suffering voice rang out:
'Name?'
'Mine? ' enquired the prisoner hurriedly, his whole being expressing
readiness to answer sensibly and to forestall any further anger.
The Procurator said quietly :
'I know my own name. Don't pretend to be stupider than you are. Your
name.'
'Yeshua,' replied the prisoner hastily.
'Surname?'
'Ha-Notsri.'
'Where are you from? '
'From the town of Gamala,' replied the prisoner, nodding his head to
show that far over there to his right, in the north, was the town of Gamala.
'Who are you by birth? '
'I don't know exactly,' promptly answered the prisoner, ' I don't
remember my parents. I was told that my father was a Syrian. . . .'
'Where is your fixed abode? '
'I have no home,' said the prisoner shamefacedly, ' I move from town
to town.'
'There is a shorter way of saying that--in a word you are a vagrant,'
said the Procurator and asked: ' Have you any relations?'
'No, none. Not one in the world.'
'Can you read and write? ' ' Yes.'
'Do you know any language besides Aramaic?
'' Yes. Greek.'
One swollen eyelid was raised and a pain-clouded eye stared at the
prisoner. The other eye remained closed. Pilate said in Greek :
'So you intended to destroy the temple building and incited the people
to do so?'
'Never, goo . . . ' Terror flashed across the prisoner's face for
having so nearly said the wrong word. ' Never in my life, hegemon, have I
intended to destroy the temple. Nor have I ever tried to persuade anyone to
do such a senseless thing.'
A look of amazement came over the secretary's face as he bent over a
low table recording the evidence. He raised his head but immediately lowered
it again over his parchment.
'People of all kinds are streaming into the city for the feast-day.
Among them there are magicians, astrologers, seers and murderers,' said the
Procurator in a monotone. ' There are also liars. You, for instance, are a
liar. It is clearly written down : he incited people to destroy the temple.
Witnesses have said so.'
'These good people,' the prisoner began, and hastily adding '
hegemon', he went on, ' are unlearned and have confused everything I said. I
am beginning to fear that this confusion will last for a very long time. And
all because he untruthfully wrote down what I said.'
There was silence. Now both pain-filled eyes stared heavily at the
prisoner.
'I repeat, but for the last time--stop pretending to be mad,
scoundrel,' said Pilate softly and evenly. ' What has been written down
about you is little enough, but it is sufficient to hang you.'
'No, no, hegemon,' said the prisoner, straining with the desire to
convince. ' This man follows me everywhere with nothing but his goatskin
parchment and writes incessantly. But I once caught a glimpse of that
parchment and I was horrified. I had not said a word of what was written
there. I begged him-- please burn this parchment of yours! But he tore it
out of my hands and ran away.'
'Who was he? ' enquired Pilate in a strained voice and put his hand to
his temple.
'Matthew the Levite,' said the prisoner eagerly. ' He was a
tax-collector. I first met him on the road to Bethlehem at the corner where
the road skirts a fig orchard and I started talking to him. At first he was

rude and even insulted me, or rather he thought he was insulting me by
calling me a dog.' The prisoner laughed. ' Personally I see nothing wrong
with that animal so I was not offended by the word. . . .'
The secretary stopped taking notes and glanced surreptitiously, not at
the prisoner, but at the Procurator.
'However, when he had heard me out he grew milder,' went on Yeshua,'
and in the end he threw his money into the road and said that he would go
travelling with me. . . .'
Pilate laughed with one cheek. Baring his yellow teeth and turning
fully round to his secretary he said :
'Oh, city of Jerusalem! What tales you have to tell! A tax-collector,
did you hear, throwing away his money!'
Not knowing what reply was expected of him, the secretary chose to
return Pilate's smile.
'And he said that henceforth he loathed his money,' said Yeshua in
explanation of Matthew the Levite's strange action, adding : ' And since
then he has been my companion.'
His teeth still bared in a grin, the Procurator glanced at the
prisoner, then at the sun rising inexorably over the equestrian statues of
the hippodrome far below to his left, and suddenly in a moment of agonising
nausea it occurred to him that the simplest thing would be to dismiss this
curious rascal from his balcony with no more than two words : ' Hang him. '
Dismiss the body-guard too, leave the arcade and go indoors, order the room
to be darkened, fall on to his couch, send for cold water, call for his dog
Banga in a pitiful voice and complain to the dog about his hemicrania.
Suddenly the tempting thought of poison flashed through the Procurator's
mind.
He stared dully at the prisoner for a while, trying painfully to recall
why this man with the bruised face was standing in front of him in the
pitiless Jerusalem morning sunshine and what further useless questions he
should put to him.
'Matthew the Levite? ' asked the suffering man in a hoarse voice,
closing his eyes.
'Yes, Matthew the Levite,' came the grating, high-pitched reply.
'So you did make a speech about the temple to the crowd in the temple
forecourt? '
The voice that answered seemed to strike Pilate on the forehead,
causing him inexpressible torture and it said:
'I spoke, hegemon, of how the temple of the old beliefs would fall
down and the new temple of truth would be built up. I used those words to
make my meaning easier to understand.'
'Why should a tramp like you upset the crowd in the bazaar by talking
about truth, something of which you have no conception? What is truth? '
At this the Procurator thought: ' Ye gods! This is a court of law and I
am asking him an irrelevant question . . . my mind no longer obeys me. . . .
' Once more he had a vision of a goblet of dark liquid. ' Poison, I need
poison.. .. ' And again he heard the voice :
'At this moment the truth is chiefly that your head is aching and
aching so hard that you are having cowardly thoughts about death. Not only
are you in no condition to talk to me, but it even hurts you to look at me.
This makes me seem to be your torturer, which distresses me. You cannot even
think and you can only long for your dog, who is clearly the only creature
for whom you have any affection. But the pain will stop soon and your
headache will go.'
The secretary stared at the prisoner, his note-taking abandoned. Pilate
raised his martyred eyes to the prisoner and saw how high the sun now stood
above the hippodrome, how a ray had penetrated the arcade, had crept towards
Yeshua's patched sandals and how the man moved aside from the sunlight. The
Procurator stood up and clasped his head in his hands. Horror came over his
yellowish, clean-shaven face. With an effort of will he controlled his
expression and sank back into his chair.
Meanwhile the prisoner continued talking, but the secretary had stopped
writing, craning his neck like a goose in the effort not to miss a single

word.
'There, it has gone,' said the prisoner, with a kindly glance at
Pilate. ' I am so glad. I would advise you, hegemon, to leave the palace for
a while and take a walk somewhere nearby, perhaps in the gardens or on Mount
Eleona. There will be thunder . . .' The prisoner turned and squinted into
the sun . . . ' later, towards evening. A walk would do you a great deal of
good and I should be happy to go with you. Some new thoughts have just come
into my head which you might, I think, find interesting and I should like to
discuss them with you, the more so as you strike me as a man of great
intelligence.' The secretary turned mortally pale and dropped his scroll to
the ground. ' Your trouble is,' went on the unstoppable prisoner, ' that
your mind is too closed and you have finally lost your faith in human
beings. You must admit that no one ought to lavish all their devotion on a
dog. Your life is a cramped one, hegemon.' Here the speaker allowed himself
to smile.
The only thought in the secretary's mind now was whether he could
believe his ears. He had to believe them. He then tried to guess in what
strange form the Procurator's fiery temper might break out at the prisoner's
unheard-of insolence. Although he knew the Procurator well the secretary's
imagination failed him.
Then the hoarse, broken voice of the Procurator barked out in Latin:
'Untie his hands.'
One of the legionary escorts tapped the ground with his lance, gave it
to his neighbour, approached and removed the prisoner's bonds. The secretary
picked up his scroll, decided to take no more notes for a while and to be
astonished at nothing he might hear.
'Tell me,' said Pilate softly in Latin, ' are you a great physician?'
'No, Procurator, I am no physician,' replied the prisoner, gratefully
rubbing his twisted, swollen, purpling wrist.
Staring from beneath his eyelids, Pilate's eyes bored into the prisoner
and those eyes were no longer dull. They now flashed with their familiar
sparkle. ' I did not ask you,' said Pilate. ' Do you know Latin too? '
'Yes, I do,' replied the prisoner.
The colour flowed back into Pilate's yellowed cheeks and he asked in
Latin:
'How did you know that I wanted to call my dog? '
'Quite simple,' the prisoner answered in Latin. ' You moved your hand
through the air . . . ' the prisoner repeated Pilate's gesture . . . ' as
though to stroke something and your lips . . .'
'Yes,' said Pilate.
There was silence. Then Pilate put a question in Greek :
'So you are a physician? '
'No, no,' was the prisoner's eager reply. ' Believe me I am not.'
'Very well, if you wish to keep it a secret, do so. It has no direct
bearing on the case. So you maintain that you never incited people to tear
down ... or burn, or by any means destroy the temple?'
'I repeat, hegemon, that I have never tried to persuade anyone to
attempt any such thing. Do I look weak in the head? '
'Oh no, you do not,' replied the Procurator quietly, and smiled an
ominous smile. ' Very well, swear that it is not so.'
'What would you have me swear by? ' enquired the unbound prisoner with
great urgency.
'Well, by your life,' replied the Procurator. ' It is high time to
swear by it because you should know that it is hanging by a thread.'
'You do not believe, do you, hegemon, that it is you who have strung
it up?' asked the prisoner. ' If you do you are mistaken.'
Pilate shuddered and answered through clenched teeth :
'I can cut that thread.'
'You are mistaken there too,' objected the prisoner, beaming and
shading himself from the sun with his hand. ' You must agree, I think, that
the thread can only be cut by the one who has suspended it? '
'Yes, yes,' said Pilate, smiling. ' I now have no doubt that the idle
gapers of Jerusalem have been pursuing you. I do not know who strung up your
tongue, but he strung it well. By the way. tell me, is it true that you

entered Jerusalem by the Susim Gate mounted on a donkey, accompanied by a
rabble who greeted you as though you were a prophet? ' Here the Procurator
pointed to a scroll of parchment.
The prisoner stared dubiously at the Procurator.
'I have no donkey, hegemon,' he said. ' I certainly came into
Jerusalem through the Susim Gate, but I came on foot alone except for
Matthew the Levite and nobody shouted a word to me as no one in Jerusalem
knew me then.'
'Do you happen to know,' went on Pilate without taking his eyes off
the prisoner, ' anyone called Dismas? Or Hestas? Or a third--Bar-Abba? '
'I do not know these good men,' replied the prisoner.
'Is that the truth? '
'It is.'
'And now tell me why you always use that expression " good men "? Is
that what you call everybody? '
'Yes, everybody,' answered the prisoner. ' There are no evil people on
earth.'
'That is news to me,' said Pilate with a laugh. ' But perhaps I am too
ignorant of life. You need take no further notes,' he said to the secretary,
although the man had taken none for some time. Pilate turned back to the
prisoner :
'Did you read about that in some Greek book? '
'No, I reached that conclusion in my own mind.'
'And is that what you preach? '
‘ Yes.'
'Centurion Mark Muribellum, for instance--is he good? '
'Yes,' replied the prisoner. ' He is, it is true, an unhappy man.
Since the good people disfigured him he has become harsh and callous. It
would be interesting to know who mutilated him.'
'That I will gladly tell you,' rejoined Pilate, ' because I was a
witness to it. These good men threw themselves at him like dogs at a bear.
The Germans clung to his neck, his arms, his legs. An infantry maniple had
been ambushed and had it not been for a troop of cavalry breaking through
from the flank--a troop commanded by me--you, philosopher, would not have
been talking to Muribellum just now. It happened at the battle of Idistavizo
in the Valley of the Virgins.'
'If I were to talk to him,' the prisoner suddenly said in a reflective
voice, ' I am sure that he would change greatly.'
'I suspect,' said Pilate, ' that the Legate of the Legion would not be
best pleased if you took it into your head to talk to one of his officers or
soldiers. Fortunately for us all any such thing is forbidden and the first
person to ensure that it cannot occur would be myself.'
At that moment a swallow darted into the arcade, circled under the
gilded ceiling, flew lower, almost brushed its pointed wingtip over the face
of a bronze statue in a niche and disappeared behind the capital of a
column, perhaps with the thought of nesting there.
As it flew an idea formed itself in the Procurator's mind, which was
now bright and clear. It was thus : the hegemon had examined the case of the
vagrant philosopher Yeshua, surnamed Ha-Notsri, and could not substantiate
the criminal charge made against him. In particular he could not find the
slightest connection between Yeshua's actions and the recent disorders in
Jerusalem. The vagrant philosopher was mentally ill, as a result of which
the sentence of death pronounced on Ha-Notsri by the Lesser Sanhedrin would
not be confirmed. But in view of the danger of unrest liable to be caused by
Yeshua's mad, Utopian preaching, the Procurator would remove the man from
Jerusalem and sentence him to imprisonment in Caesarea Stratonova on the
Mediterranean--the place of the Procurator's own residence. It only remained
to dictate this to the secretary.
The swallow's wings fluttered over the hegemon's head, the bird flew
towards the fountain and out into freedom.
The Procurator raised his eyes to the prisoner and saw that a column of
dust had swirled up beside him.
'Is that all there is on this man? ' Pilate asked the secretary.
'No, unfortunately,' replied the secretary unexpectedly, and handed

Pilate another parchment.
'What else is there? ' enquired Pilate and frowned.
Having read the further evidence a change came over his expression.
Whether it was blood flowing back into his neck and face or from something
else that occurred, his skin changed from yellow to red-brown and his eyes
appeared to collapse. Probably caused by the increased blood-pressure in his
temples, something happened to the Procurator's sight. He seemed to see the
prisoner's head vanish and another appear in its place, bald and crowned
with a spiked golden diadem. The skin of the forehead was split by a round,
livid scar smeared with ointment. A sunken, toothless mouth with a
capricious, pendulous lower lip. Pilate had the sensation that the pink
columns of his balcony and the roofscape of Jerusalem below and beyond the
garden had all vanished, drowned in the thick foliage of cypress groves. His
hearing, too, was strangely affected--there was a sound as of distant
trumpets, muted and threatening, and a nasal voice could clearly be heard
arrogantly intoning the words: ' The law pertaining to high treason . . .'
Strange, rapid, disconnected thoughts passed through his mind. ' Dead!
' Then : ' They have killed him! . . .' And an absurd notion about
immortality, the thought of which aroused a sense of unbearable grief.
Pilate straightened up, banished the vision, turned his gaze back to
the balcony and again the prisoner's eyes met his.
'Listen, Ha-Notsri,' began the Procurator, giving Yeshua a strange
look. His expression was grim but his eyes betrayed anxiety. ' Have you ever
said anything about great Caesar? Answer! Did you say anything of the sort?
Or did you . . . not? ' Pilate gave the word 'not' more emphasis than was
proper in a court of law and his look seemed to be trying to project a
particular thought into the prisoner's mind. ' Telling the truth is easy and
pleasant,' remarked the prisoner.
'I do not want to know,' replied Pilate in a voice of suppressed
anger, ' whether you enjoy telling the truth or not. You are obliged to tell
me the truth. But when you speak weigh every word, if you wish to avoid a
painful death.'
No one knows what passed through the mind of the Procurator of Judaea,
but he permitted himself to raise his hand as though shading himself from a
ray of sunlight and, shielded by that hand, to throw the prisoner a glance
that conveyed a hint.
'So,' he said, ' answer this question : do you know a certain Judas of
Karioth and if you have ever spoken to him what did you say to him about
Caesar? '
'It happened thus,' began the prisoner readily. ' The day before
yesterday, in the evening, I met a young man near the temple who called
himself Judas, from the town of Karioth. He invited me to his home in the
Lower City and gave me supper...'
'Is he a good man? ' asked Pilate, a diabolical glitter in his eyes.
'A very good man and eager to learn,' affirmed the prisoner. ' He
expressed the greatest interest in my ideas and welcomed me joyfully .. . '
'Lit the candles. . . .' said Pilate through clenched teeth to the
prisoner, his eyes glittering.
'Yes,' said Yeshua, slightly astonished that the Procurator should be
so well informed, and went on : ' He asked me for my views on the
government. The question interested him very much.'
'And so what did you say? ' asked Pilate. ' Or are you going to reply
that you have forgotten what you said? ' But there was already a note of
hopelessness in Pilate's voice.
'Among other things I said,' continued the prisoner, ' that all power
is a form of violence exercised over people and that the time will come when
there will be no rule by Caesar nor any other form of rule. Man will pass
into the kingdom of truth and justice where no sort of power will be
needed.'
'Go on!'
'There is no more to tell,' said the prisoner. ' After that some men
came running in, tied me up and took me to prison.'
The secretary, straining not to miss a word, rapidly scribbled the
statement on his parchment.

'There never has been, nor yet shall be a greater and more perfect
government in this world than the rule of the emperor Tiberius!' Pilate's
voice rang out harshly and painfully. The Procurator stared at his secretary
and at the bodyguard with what seemed like hatred. ' And what business have
you, a criminal lunatic, to discuss such matters! ' Pilate shouted. ' Remove
the guards from the balcony! ' And turning to his secretary he added: '
Leave me alone with this criminal. This is a case of treason.'
The bodyguard raised their lances and with the measured tread of their
iron-shod caligae marched from the balcony towards the garden followed by
the secretary.
For a while the silence on the balcony was only disturbed bv the
splashing of the fountain. Pilate watched the water splay out at the apex of
the jet and drip downwards.
The prisoner was the first to speak :
'I see that there has been some trouble as a result of my conversation
with that young man from Karioth. I have a presentiment, hegemon, that some
misfortune will befall him and I feel very sorry for him.'
'I think,' replied the Procurator with a strange smile, ' that there
is someone else in this world for whom you should feel sorrier than for
Judas of Karioth and who is destined for a fate much worse than Judas'! ...
So Mark Muribellum, a coldblooded killer, the people who I see '--the
Procurator pointed to Yeshua's disfigured face--' beat you for what you
preached, the robbers Dismas and Hestas who with their confederates killed
four soldiers, and finally this dirty informer Judas--are they all good men?
'
'Yes,' answered the prisoner.
'And will the kingdom of truth come? ' ' It will, hegemon,' replied
Yeshua with conviction.
'It will never come! ' Pilate suddenly shouted in a voice so terrible
that Yeshua staggered back. Many years ago in the Valley of the Virgins
Pilate had shouted in that same voice to his horsemen : ' Cut them down! Cut
them down! They have caught the giant Muribellum!' And again he raised his
parade-ground voice, barking out the words so that they would be heard in
the garden : ' Criminal! Criminal! Criminal! ' Then lowering his voice he
asked : ' Yeshua Ha-Notsri, do you believe in any gods?'
'God is one,' answered Yeshua. ' I believe in Him.'
'Then pray to him! Pray hard! However,' at this Pilate's voice fell
again, ' it will do no good. Have you a wife? ' asked Pilate with a sudden
inexplicable access of depression.
'No, I am alone.'
'I hate this city,' the Procurator suddenly mumbled, hunching his
shoulders as though from cold and wiping his hands as though washing them. '
If they had murdered you before your meeting with Judas of Karioth I really
believe it would have been better.'
'You should let me go, hegemon,' was the prisoner's unexpected
request, his voice full of anxiety. ' I see now that they want to kill me.'
A spasm distorted Pilate's face as he turned his blood-shot eyes on
Yeshua and said :
'Do you imagine, you miserable creature, that a Roman Procurator could
release a man who has said what you have said to me? Oh gods, oh gods! Or do
you think I'm prepared to take your place? I don't believe in your ideas!
And listen to me : if from this moment onward you say so much as a word or
try to talk to anybody, beware! I repeat--beware!'
'Hegemon . ..'
'Be quiet! ' shouted Pilate, his infuriated stare following the
swallow which had flown on to the balcony again. ' Here!' shouted Pilate.
The secretary and the guards returned to their places and Pilate
announced that he confirmed the sentence of death pronounced by the Lesser
Sanhedrin on the accused Yeshua Ha-Notsri and the secretary recorded
Pilate's words.
A minute later centurion Mark Muribellum stood before the Procurator.
He was ordered by the Procurator to hand the felon over to the captain of
the secret service and in doing so to transmit the Procurator's directive
that Yeshua Ha-Notsri was to be segregated from the other convicts, also

that the captain of the secret service was forbidden on pain of severe
punishment to talk to Yeshua or to answer any questions he might ask.
At a signal from Mark the guard closed ranks around Yeshua and escorted
him from the balcony.
Later the Procurator received a call from a handsome man with a blond
beard, eagles' feathers in the crest of his helmet, glittering lions'
muzzles on his breastplate, a gold-studded sword belt, triple-soled boots
laced to the knee and a purple cloak thrown over his left shoulder. He was
the commanding officer, the Legate of the Legion.
The Procurator asked him where the Sebastian cohort was stationed. The
Legate reported that the Sebastian was on cordon duty in the square in front
of the hippodrome, where the sentences on the prisoners would be announced
to the crowd.
Then the Procurator instructed the Legate to detach two centuries from
the Roman cohort. One of them, under the command of Muribellum, was to
escort the convicts, the carts transporting the executioners' equipment and
the executioners themselves to Mount Golgotha and on arrival to cordon off
the summit area. The other was to proceed at once to Mount Golgotha and to
form a cordon immediately on arrival. To assist in the task of guarding the
hill, the Procurator asked the Legate to despatch an auxiliary cavalry
regiment, the Syrian ala.
When the Legate had left the balcony, the Procurator ordered his
secretary to summon to the palace the president of the Sanhedrin, two of its
members and the captain of the Jerusalem temple guard, but added that he
wished arrangements to be made which would allow him, before conferring with
all these people, to have a private meeting with the president of the
Sanhedrin.
The Procurator's orders were carried out rapidly and precisely and the
sun, which had lately seemed to scorch Jerusalem with such particular
vehemence, had not yet reached its zenith when the meeting took place
between the Procurator and the president of the Sanhedrin, the High Priest
of Judaea, Joseph Caiaphas. They met on the upper terrace of the garden
between two white marble lions guarding the staircase.
It was quiet in the garden. But as he emerged from the arcade on to the
sun-drenched upper terrace of the garden with its palms on their monstrous
elephantine legs, the terrace from which the whole of Pilate's detested city
of Jerusalem lay spread out before the Procurator with its suspension
bridges, its fortresses and over it all that indescribable lump of marble
with a golden dragon's scale instead of a roof--the temple of Jerusalem--the
Procurator's sharp hearing detected far below, down there where a stone wall
divided the lower terraces of the palace garden from the city square, a low
rumbling broken now and again by faint sounds, half groans, half cries.
The Procurator realised that already there was assembling in the square
a numberless crowd of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, excited by the recent
disorders; that this crowd was waiting impatiently for the pronouncement of
sentence and that the water-sellers were busily shouting their wares.
The Procurator began by inviting the High Priest on to the balcony to
find some shade from the pitiless heat, but Caiaphas politely excused
himself, explaining that he could not do that on the eve of a feast-day.
Pilate pulled his cowl over his slightly balding head and began the
conversation, which was conducted in Greek.
Pilate remarked that he had examined the case of Yeshua Ha-Notsri and
had confirmed the sentence of death. Consequently those due for execution
that day were the three robbers--Hestas, Dismas and Bar-Abba--and now this
other man, Yeshua Ha- Notsri. The first two, who had tried to incite the
people to rebel against Caesar, had been forcibly apprehended by the Roman
authorities; they were therefore the Procurator's responsibility and there
was no reason to discuss their case. The last two, however, Bar-Abba and
Ha-Notsri, had been arrested by the local authorities and tried before the
Sanhedrin. In accordance with law and custom, one of these two criminals
should be released in honour of the imminent great feast of Passover. The
Procurator therefore wished to know which of these two felons the Sanhedrin
proposed to discharge--Bar-Abba or Ha-Notsri?
Caiaphas inclined his head as a sign that he understood the question

and replied:
'The Sanhedrin requests the release of Bar-Abba.' The Procurator well
knew that this would be the High Priest's reply; his problem was to show
that the request aroused his astonishment.
This Pilate did with great skill. The eyebrows rose on his proud
forehead and the Procurator looked the High Priest straight in the eye with
amazement.
'I confess that your reply surprises me,' began the Procurator softly.
' I fear there may have been some misunderstanding here.'
Pilate stressed that the Roman government wished to make no inroads
into the prerogatives of the local priestly authority, the High Priest was
well aware of that, but in this particular case an obvious error seemed to
have occurred. And the Roman government naturally had an interest in
correcting such an error. The crimes of Bar-Abba and Ha-Notsri were after
all not comparable in gravity. If the latter, a man who was clearly insane,
were guilty of making some absurd speeches in Jerusalem and various other
localities, the former stood convicted of offences that were infinitely more
serious. Not only had he permitted himself to make direct appeals to
rebellion, but he had killed a sentry while resisting arrest. Bar-Abba was
immeasurably more dangerous than Ha-Notsri. In view of all these facts, the
Procurator requested the High Priest to reconsider his decision and to
discharge the least dangerous of the two convicts and that one was
undoubtedly Ha-Notsri . . . Therefore?
Caiaphas said in a quiet but firm voice that the Sanhedrin had taken
due cognisance of the case and repeated its intention to release Bar-Abba.
'What? Even after my intervention? The intervention of the
representative of the Roman government? High Priest, say it for the third
time.'
'And for the third time I say that we shall release Bar-Abba,' said
Caiaphas softly.
It was over and there was no more to be discussed. Ha-Notsri had gone
for ever and there was no one to heal the Procurator's terrible, savage
pains ; there was no cure for them now except death. But this thought did
not strike Pilate immediately. At first his whole being was seized with the
same incomprehensible sense of grief which had come to him on the balcony.
He at once sought for its explanation and its cause was a strange one : the
Procurator was obscurely aware that he still had something to say to the
prisoner and that perhaps, too, he had more to learn from him.
Pilate banished the thought and it passed as quickly as it had come. It
passed, yet that grievous ache remained a mystery, for it could not be
explained by another thought that had flashed in and out of his mind like
lightning--' Immortality ... immortality has come . . .' Whose immortality
had come? The Procurator could not understand it, but that puzzling thought
of immortality sent a chill over him despite the sun's heat.
'Very well,' said Pilate. ' So be it.'
With that he looked round. The visible world vanished from his sight
and an astonishing change occurred. The flower-laden rosebush disappeared,
the cypresses fringing the upper terrace disappeared, as did the pomegranate
tree, the white statue among the foliage and the foliage itself. In their
place came a kind of dense purple mass in which seaweed waved and swayed and
Pilate himself was swaying with it. He was seized, suffocating and burning,
by the most terrible rage of all rage--the rage of impotence.
'I am suffocating,' said Pilate. ' Suffocating! '
With a cold damp hand he tore the buckle from the collar of his cloak
and it fell on to the sand.
'It is stifling today, there is a thunderstorm brewing,' said
Caiaphas, his gaze fixed on the Procurator's reddening face, foreseeing all
the discomfort that the weather was yet to bring. ' The month of Nisan has
been terrible this year! '
'No,' said Pilate. ' That is not why I am suffocating. I feel stifled
by your presence, Caiaphas.' Narrowing his eyes Pilate added : ' Beware,
High Priest! '
The High Priest's dark eyes flashed and--no less cunningly than the
Procurator--his face showed astonishment.

'What do I hear, Procurator? ' Caiaphas answered proudly and calmly. '
Are you threatening me--when sentence has been duly pronounced and confirmed
by yourself? Can this be so? We are accustomed to the Roman Procurator
choosing his words carefully before saying anything. I trust no one can have
overheard us, hegemon?'
With lifeless eyes Pilate gazed at the High Priest and manufactured a
smile.
'Come now. High Priest! Who can overhear us here? Do you take me for a
fool, like that crazy young vagrant who is to be executed today? Am I a
child, Caiphas? I know what I'm saying and where I'm saying it. This garden,
this whole palace is so well cordoned that there's not a crack for a mouse
to slip through. Not a mouse--and not even that man--what's his name . .?
That man from Karioth. You do know him, don't you, High Priest? Yes ... if
someone like that were to get in here, he would bitterly regret it. You
believe me when I say that, don't you? I tell you, High Priest, that from
henceforth you shall have no peace! Neither you nor your people '--Pilate
pointed to the right where the pinnacle of the temple flashed in the
distance. ' I, Pontius Pilate, knight of the Golden Lance, tell you so! ' '
I know it! ' fearlessly replied the bearded Caiaphas. His eyes flashed as he
raised his hand to the sky and went on : ' The Jewish people knows that you
hate it with a terrible hatred and that you have brought it much
suffering--but you will never destroy it! God will protect it. And he shall
hear us--mighty Caesar shall hear us and protect us from Pilate the
oppressor! '
'Oh no! ' rejoined Pilate, feeling more and more relieved with every
word that he spoke; there was no longer any need to dissemble, no need to
pick his words : ' You have complained of me to Caesar too often and now my
hour has come, Caiaphas! Now I shall send word--but not to the viceroy in
Antioch, not even to Rome but straight to Capreia, to the emperor himself,
word of how you in Jerusalem are saving convicted rebels from death. And
then it will not be water from Solomon's pool, as I once intended for your
benefit, that I shall give Jerusalem to drink--no, it will not be water!
Remember how thanks to you I was made to remove the shields with the
imperial cipher from the walls, to transfer troops, to come and take charge
here myself! Remember my words. High Priest: you are going to see more than
one cohort here in Jerusalem! Under the city walls you are going to see the
Fulminata legion at full strength and Arab cavalry too. Then the weeping and
lamentation will be bitter! Then you will remember that you saved Bar-Abba
and you will regret that you sent that preacher of peace to his death!
Flecks of colour spread over the High Priest's face, his eyes burned.
Like the Procurator he grinned mirthlessly and replied:
'Do you really believe what you have just said, Procurator? No, you do
not! It was not peace that this rabble-rouser brought to Jerusalem and of
that, hegamon, you are well aware. You wanted to release him so that he
could stir up the people, curse our faith and deliver the people to your
Roman swords! But as long as I, the High Priest of Judaea, am alive I shall
not allow the faith to be defamed and I shall protect the people! Do you
hear, Pilate?' With this Caiaphas raised his arm threateningly;
'Take heed. Procurator! '
Caiaphas was silent and again the Procurator heard a murmuring as of
the sea, rolling up to the very walls of Herod the Great's garden. The sound
flowed upwards from below until it seemed to swirl round the Procurator's
legs and into his face. Behind his back, from beyond the wings of the
palace, came urgent trumpet calls, the heavy crunch of hundreds of feet, the
clank of metal. It told the Procurator that the Roman infantry was marching
out, on his orders, to the execution parade that was to strike terror into
the hearts of all thieves and rebels
'Do you hear. Procurator? ' the High Priest quietly repeated his
words. ' Surely you are not trying to tell me that all this '-- here the
High Priest raised both arms and his dark cowl slipped from his head--' can
have been evoked by that miserable thief Bar-Abba?'
With the back of his wrist the Procurator wiped his damp, cold
forehead, stared at the ground, then frowning skywards he saw that the
incandescent ball was nearly overhead, that Caiaphas' shadow had shrunk to

almost nothing and he said in a calm, expressionless voice :
'The execution will be at noon. We have enjoyed this conversation, but
matters must proceed.'
Excusing himself to the High Priest in a few artificial phrases, he
invited him to sit down on a bench in the shade of a magnolia and to wait
while he summoned the others necessary for the final short consultation and
to give one more order concerning the execution.
Caiaphas bowed politely, placing his hand on his heart, and remained in
the garden while Pilate returned to the balcony. There he ordered his
waiting secretary to call the Legate of the Legion and the Tribune of the
cohort into the garden, also the two members of the Sanhedrin and the
captain of the temple guard, who were standing grouped round the fountain on
the lower terrace awaiting his call. Pilate added that he would himself
shortly return to join them in the garden, and disappeared inside the
palace.
While the secretary convened the meeting, inside his darken-ed,
shuttered room the Procurator spoke to a man whose face, despite the
complete absence of sunlight from the room, remained half covered by a hood.
The interview was very short. The Procurator whispered a few words to the
man, who immediately departed. Pilate passed through the arcade into the
garden.
There in the presence of all the men he had asked to see, the
Procurator solemnly and curtly repeated that he confirmed the sentence of
death on Yeshua Ha-Notsri and enquired officially of the Sanhedrin members
as to which of the prisoners it had pleased them to release. On being told
that it was Bar-Abba, the Procurator said:
'Very well,' and ordered the secretary to enter it in the minutes. He
clutched the buckle which the secretary had picked up from the sand and
announced solemnly : ' It is time! '
At this all present set off down the broad marble staircase between the
lines of rose bushes, exuding their stupefying aroma, down towards the
palace wall, to a gate leading to the smoothly paved square at whose end
could be seen the columns and statues of the Jerusalem hippodrome.
As soon as the group entered the square and began climbing up to the
broad temporary wooden platform raised high above the square, Pilate
assessed the situation through narrowed eyelids.
The cleared passage that he had just crossed between the palace walls
and the scaffolding platform was empty, but in front of Pilate the square
could no longer be seen--it had been devoured by the crowd. The mob would
have poured on to the platform and the passage too if there had not been two
triple rows of soldiers, one from the Sebastian cohort on Pilate's left and
on his right another from the Ituraean auxiliary cohort, to keep it clear.
Pilate climbed the platform, mechanically clenching and unclenching his
fist on the useless buckle and frowning hard. The Procurator was not
frowning because the sun was blinding him but to somehow avoid seeing the
group of prisoners which, as he well knew, would shortly be led out on the
platform behind him.
The moment the white cloak with the blood-red lining appeared atop the
stone block at the edge of that human sea a wave of sound--' Aaahh '--struck
the unseeing Pilate's ears. It began softly, far away at the hippodrome end
of the square, then grew to thunderous volume and after a few seconds, began
to diminish again. ' They have seen me,' thought the Procurator. The wave of
sound did not recede altogether and began unexpectedly to grow again and
waveringly rose to a higher pitch than the first and on top of the second
surge of noise, like foam on the crest of a wave at sea, could be heard
whistles and the shrieks of several women audible above the roar. ' That
means they have led them out on to the platform,' thought Pilate, ' and
those screams are from women who were crushed when the crowd surged
forward.'
He waited for a while, knowing that nothing could silence the crowd
until it had let loose its pent-up feelings and quietened of its own accord.
When that moment came tlie Procurator threw up his right hand and the
last murmurings of the crowd expired. Then Pilate took as deep a breath as
he could of the hot air and his cracked voice rang out over the thousands of

heads :
'In the name of imperial Caesar! . . .'
At once his ears were struck by a clipped, metallic chorus as the
cohorts, raising lances and standards, roared out their fearful response:
'Hail, Caesar! '
Pilate jerked his head up straight at the sun. He had a sensation of
green fire piercing his eyelids, his brain seemed to burn. In hoarse Aramaic
he flung his words out over the crowd :
'Four criminals, arrested in Jerusalem for murder, incitement to
rebellion, contempt of the law and blasphemy, have been condemned to the
most shameful form of execution--crucifixion! Their execution will be
carried out shortly on Mount Golgotha The names of these felons are Dismas,
Hestas, Bar-Abba and Ha-Notsri and there they stand before you! '
Pilate pointed to the right, unable to see the prisoners but knowing
that they were standing where they should be.
The crowd responded with a long rumble that could have been surprise or
relief. When it had subsided Pilate went on :
'But only three of them are to be executed for, in accordance with law
and custom, in honour of the great feast of Passover the emperor Caesar in
his magnanimity will, at the choice of the Lesser Sanhedrin and with the
approval of the Roman government, render back to one of these convicted men
his contemptible life!'
As Pilate rasped out his words he noticed that the rumbling had given
way to a great silence. Now not a sigh, not a rustle reached his ears and
there even came a moment when it seemed to Pilate that the people around him
had vanished altogether. The city he so hated might have died and only he
alone stood there, scorched by the vertical rays of the sun, his face
craning skywards. Pilate allowed the silence to continue and then began to
shout again: ' The name of the man who is about to be released before you .
. .'
He paused once more, holding back the name, mentally confirming that he
had said everything, because he knew that as soon as he pronounced the name
of the fortunate man the lifeless city would awaken and nothing more that he
might say would be audible.
'Is that everything? ' Pilate whispered soundlessly to himself. ' Yes,
it is. Now the name! ' And rolling his ' r 's over the heads of the silent
populace he roared : ' Bar-Abba! '
It was as though the sun detonated above him and drowned his ears in
fire, a fire that roared, shrieked, groaned, laughed and whistled.
Pilate turned and walked back along the platform towards the steps,
glancing only at the parti-coloured wooden blocks of the steps beneath his
feet to save himself from stumbling. He knew that behind his back a hail of
bronze coins and dates was showering the platform, that people in the
whooping crowd, elbowing each other aside, were climbing on to shoulders to
see a miracle with their own eyes--a man already in the arms of death and
torn from their grasp! They watched the legionaries as they untied his
bonds, involuntarily causing him searing pain in his swollen arms, watched
as grimacing and complaining he nevertheless smiled an insane, senseless
smile.
Pilate knew that the escort was now marching the three bound prisoners
to the side steps of the platform to lead them off on the road westward, out
of the city, towards Mount Golgotha. Only when he stood beneath and behind
the platform did Pilate open his eyes, knowing that he was now safe--he
could no longer see the convicted men.
As the roar of the crowd began to die down the separate, piercing
voices of the heralds could be heard repeating, one in Aramaic, the others
in Greek, the announcement that the Procurator had just made from the
platform. Besides that his ears caught the approaching irregular clatter of
horses' hoofs and the sharp, bright call of a trumpet. This sound was echoed
by the piercing whistles of boys from the rooftops and by shouts of ' Look
out! '
A lone soldier, standing in the space cleared in the square, waved his
standard in warning, at which the Procurator, the Legate of the Legion and
their escort halted.

A squadron of cavalry entered the square at a fast trot, cutting across
it diagonally, past a knot of people, then down a side-street along a
vine-covered stone wall in order to gallop on to Mount Golgotha by the
shortest route.
As the squadron commander, a Syrian as small as a boy and as dark as a
mulatto, trotted past Pilate he gave a high-pitched cry and drew his sword
from its scabbard. His sweating, ugly-tempered black horse snorted and
reared up on its hind legs. Sheathing his sword the commander struck the
horse's neck with his whip, brought its forelegs down and moved off down the
side street, breaking into a gallop. Behind him in columns of three galloped
the horsemen in a ha2e of dust, the tips of their bamboo lances bobbing
rhythmically. They swept past the Procurator, their faces unnaturally dark
in contrast with their white turbans, grinning cheerfully, teeth flashing.
Raising a cloud of dust the squadron surged down the street, the last
trooper to pass Pilate carrying a glinting trumpet slung across his back.
Shielding his face from the dust with his hand and frowning with
annoyance Pilate walked on, hurrying towards the gate of the palace garden
followed by the Legate, the secretary and the escort.
It was about ten o'clock in the morning.

3. The Seventh Proof

'Yes, it was about ten o'clock in the morning, my dear Ivan
Nikolayich,' said the professor.
The poet drew his hand across his face like a man who has just woken up
and noticed that it was now evening. The water in the pond had turned black,
a little boat was gliding across it and he could hear the splash of an oar
and a girl's laughter in the boat. People were beginning to appear in the
avenues and were sitting on the benches on all sides of the square except on
the side where our friends were talking.
Over Moscow it was as if the sky had blossomed : a clear, full moon had
risen, still white and not yet golden. It was much less stuffy and the
voices under the lime trees now had an even-tide softness.
'Why didn't I notice what a long story he's been telling us? ' thought
Bezdomny in amazement. ' It's evening already! Perhaps he hasn't told it at
all but I simply fell asleep and dreamed it?'
But if the professor had not told the story Berlioz must have been
having the identical dream because he said, gazing attentively into the
stranger's face :
'Your story is extremely interesting, professor, but it diners
completely from the accounts in the gospels.'
'But surely,' replied the professor with a condescending smile, ' you
of all people must realise that absolutely nothing written in the gospels
actually happened. If you want to regard the gospels as a proper historical
source . . .' He smiled again and Berlioz was silenced. He had just been
saying exactly the same thing to Bezdomny on their walk from Bronnaya Street
to Patriarch's Ponds.
'I agree,' answered Berlioz, ' but I'm afraid that no one is in a
position to prove the authenticity of your version either.'
'Oh yes! I can easily confirm it! ' rejoined the professor with great
confidence, lapsing into his foreign accent and mysteriously beckoning the
two friends closer. They bent towards him from both sides and he began, this
time without a trace of his accent which seemed to come and go without rhyme
or reason :
'The fact is . . .' here the professor glanced round nervously and
dropped his voice to a whisper, ' I was there myself. On the balcony with
Pontius Pilate, in the garden when he talked to Caiaphas and on the
platform, but secretly, incognito so to speak, so don't breathe a word of it

to anyone and please keep it an absolute secret, sshhh . . .'
There was silence. Berlioz went pale.
'How . . . how long did you say you'd been in Moscow? ' he asked in a
shaky voice.
'I have just this minute arrived in Moscow,' replied the professor,
slightly disconcerted. Only then did it occur to the two friends to look him
properly in the eyes. They saw that his green left eye was completely mad,
his right eye black, expressionless and dead.
'That explains it all,' thought Berlioz perplexedly. ' He's some mad
German who's just arrived or else he's suddenly gone out of his mind here at
Patriarch's. What an extraordinary business! ' This really seemed to account
for everything--the mysterious breakfast with the philosopher Kant, the
idiotic ramblings about sunflower-seed oil and Anna, the prediction about
Berlioz's head being cut off and all the rest: the professor was a lunatic.
Berlioz at once started to think what they ought to do. Leaning back on
the bench he winked at Bezdomny behind the professor's back, meaning '
Humour him! ' But the poet, now thoroughly confused, failed to understand
the signal.
'Yes, yes, yes,' said Berlioz with great animation. ' It's quite
possible, of course. Even probable--Pontius Pilate, the balcony, and so on.
. . . Have you come here alone or with your wife? '
'Alone, alone, I am always alone,' replied the professor bitterly.
'But where is your luggage, professor?' asked Berlioz cunningly. ' At
the Metropole? Where are you staying? '
'Where am I staying? Nowhere. . . .' answered the mad German, staring
moodily around Patriarch's Ponds with his g:reen eye
'What! . . . But . . . where are you going to live? '
'In your flat,' the lunatic suddenly replied casually and winked.
'I'm ... I should be delighted . . .' stuttered Berlioz, : ‘but I'm
afraid you wouldn't be very comfortable at my place . . - the rooms at the
Metropole are excellent, it's a first-class hotel . . .'
'And the devil doesn't exist either, I suppose? ' the madman suddenly
enquired cheerfully of Ivan Nikolayich.
'And the devil . . .'
'Don't contradict him,' mouthed Berlioz silently, leaning back and
grimacing behind the professor's back.
'There's no such thing as the devil! ' Ivan Nikolayich burst out,
hopelessly muddled by all this dumb show, ruining all Berlioz's plans by
shouting: ' And stop playing the amateur psychologist! '
At this the lunatic gave such a laugh that it startled the sparrows out
of the tree above them.
'Well now, that is interesting,' said the professor, quaking with
laughter. ' Whatever I ask you about--it doesn't exist! ' He suddenly
stopped laughing and with a typical madman's reaction he immediately went to
the other extreme, shouting angrily and harshly : ' So you think the devil
doesn't exist? '
'Calm down, calm down, calm down, professor,' stammered Berlioz,
frightened of exciting this lunatic. ' You stay here a minute with comrade
Bezdomny while I run round the corner and make a 'phone call and then we'll
take you where you want to go. You don't know your way around town, sitter
all... .' Berlioz's plan was obviously right--to run to the nearest
telephone box and tell the Aliens' Bureau that there was a foreign professor
sitting at Patriarch's Ponds who was clearly insane. Something had to be
done or there might be a nasty scene.
'Telephone? Of course, go and telephone if you want to,' agreed the
lunatic sadly, and then suddenly begged with passion :
'But please--as a farewell request--at least say you believe in the
devil! I won't ask anything more of you. Don't forget that there's still the
seventh proof--the soundest! And it's just about to be demonstrated to you!
'
'All right, all right,' said Berlioz pretending to agree. With a wink
to the wretched Bezdomny, who by no means relished the thought of keeping
watch on this crazy German, he rushed towards the park gates at the corner
of Bronnaya and Yermolay-evsky Streets.

At once the professor seemed to recover his reason and good spirits.
'Mikhail Alexandrovich! ' he shouted after Berlioz, who shuddered as
he turned round and then remembered that the professor could have learned
his name from a newspaper.
The professor, cupping his hands into a trumpet, shouted :
'Wouldn't you like me to send a telegram to your uncle in Kiev? '
Another shock--how did this madman know that he had an uncle in Kiev?
Nobody had ever put that in any newspaper. Could Bezdomny be right about him
after all? And what about those phoney-looking documents of his? Definitely
a weird character . . . ring up, ring up the Bureau at once . . . they'll
come and sort it all out in no time.
Without waiting to hear any more, Berlioz ran on.
At the park gates leading into Bronnaya Street, the identical man, whom
a short while ago the editor had seen materialise out of a mirage, got up
from a bench and walked toward him. This time, however, he was not made of
air but of flesh and blood. In the early twilight Berlioz could clearly
distinguish his feathery little moustache, his little eyes, mocking and half
drunk, his check trousers pulled up so tight that his dirty white socks were
showing.
Mikhail Alexandrovich stopped, but dismissed it as a ridiculous
coincidence. He had in any case no time to stop and puzzle it out now.
'Are you looking for the turnstile, sir? ' enquired the check-clad man
in a quavering tenor. ' This way, please! Straight on for the exit. How
about the price of a drink for showing you the way, sir? ... church
choirmaster out of work, sir ... need a helping hand, sir. . . .' Bending
double, the weird creature pulled off his jockey cap in a sweeping gesture.
Without stopping to listen to the choirmaster's begging and whining,
Berlioz ran to the turnstile and pushed it. Having passed through he was
just about to step off the pavement and cross the tramlines when a white and
red light flashed in his face and the pedestrian signal lit up with the
words ' Stop! Tramway!' A tram rolled into view, rocking slightly along the
newly-laid track that ran down Yermolayevsky Street and into Bronnaya. As it
turned to join the main line it suddenly switched its inside lights on,
hooted and accelerated.
Although he was standing in safety, the cautious Berlioz decided to
retreat behind the railings. He put his hand on the turnstile and took a
step backwards. He missed his grip and his foot slipped on the cobbles as
inexorably as though on ice. As it slid towards the tramlines his other leg
gave way and Berlioz was thrown across the track. Grabbing wildly, Berlioz
fell prone. He struck his head violently on the cobblestones and the gilded
moon flashed hazily across his vision. He just had time to turn on his back,
drawing his legs up to his stomach with a frenzied movement and as he turned
over he saw the woman tram-driver's face, white with horror above her red
necktie, as she bore down on him with irresistible force and speed. Berlioz
made no sound, but all round him the street rang with the desperate shrieks
of women's voices. The driver grabbed the electric brake, the car pitched
forward, jumped the rails and with a tinkling crash the glass broke in all
its windows. At this moment Berlioz heard a despairing voice: ' Oh, no . .
.! ' Once more and for the last time the moon flashed before his eyes but it
split into fragments and then went black.
Berlioz vanished from sight under the tramcar and a round, dark object
rolled across the cobbles, over the kerbstone and bounced along the
pavement.
It was a severed head.

4. The Pursuit

The women's hysterical shrieks and the sound, of police whistles died
away. Two ambulances drove on, one bearing the body and the decapitated head
to the morgue, the other carrying the beautiful tram-driver who had been

wounded by slivers of glass. Street sweepers in white overalls swept up the
broken glass and poare'd sand on the pools of blood. Ivan Nikolayich, who
had failed to reach the turnstile in time, collapsed on a bench and remained
there. Several times he tried to ge:t up, but his legs refuse d to obey him,
stricken by a kind of paralysis.
The moment he had heard the first cry the poet had rushed towards the
turnstile and seen the head bouncing on the pavement. The sight unnerved him
so much that he bit his hand until it drew blood. He had naturally forgotten
all about the mad German and could do nothing but wonder how one minute he
coald have been talking to Berlioz and the next... his head ...
Excited people were running along the avenue past the poet shouting
something, but Ivan Nikolayich did not hear them. Suddenly two women
collided alongside him and one of them, witlh a pointed nose and straight
hair, shouted to the other woman just above his ear :
'.. . Anna, it was our Anna! She was coming from Sadovaya! It's her
job, you see . . . she was carrying a litre of sunflower-seed oil to the
grocery and she broke her jug on. the turnstile! It went all over her skirt
amd ruined it and she swore and swore....! And that poor man must have
slipped on the oil and fallen under the tram....'
One word stuck in Ivan Nikolayich's brain--' Anna' . . . ' Anna? . . .
Anna? ' muttered the poet, looking round in alarm. ' Hey, what was that you
said . . .? '
The name ' Anna ' evoked the words ' sunflower-seed oil' and ' Pontius
Pilate '. Bezdomny rejected 'Pilate' and began linking together a chain of
associations starting with ' Anna'. Very soon the chain was complete and it
led straight back to the mad professor.
'Of course! He said the meeting wouldn't take place because Anna had
spilled the oil. And, by God, it won't take place now! And what's more he
said Berlioz would have his head cut off by a woman!! Yes--and the
tram-driver was a woman!!! Who the hell is he? '
There was no longer a grain of doubt that the mysterious professor had
foreseen every detail of Berlioz's death before it had occurred. Two
thoughts struck the poet: firstly--' he's no madman ' and secondly--' did he
arrange the whole thing himself?'
'But how on earth could he? We've got to look into this! '
With a tremendous effort Ivan Nikolayich got up from the bench and ran
back to where he had been talking to the professor, who was fortunately
still there.
The lamps were already lit on Bronnaya Street and a golden moon was
shining over Patriarch's Ponds. By the light of the moon, deceptive as it
always is, it seemed to Ivan Nikolayich that the thing under the professor's
arm was not a stick but a sword.
The ex-choirmaster was sitting on the seat occupied a short while
before by Ivan Nikolayich himself. The choirmaster had now clipped on to his
nose an obviously useless pince-nez. One lens was missing and the other
rattled in its frame. It made the check-suited man look even more repulsive
than when he had shown Berlioz the way to the tramlines. With a chill of
fear Ivan walked up to the professor. A glance at his face convinced him
that there was not a trace of insanity in it.
'Confess--who are you? ' asked Ivan grimly.
The stranger frowned, looked at the poet as if seeing him for the first
time, and answered disagreeably :
'No understand ... no speak Russian . . . '
'He doesn't understand,' put in the choirmaster from his bench,
although no one had asked him.
'Stop pretending! ' said Ivan threateningly, a cold feeling growing in
the pit of his stomach. ' Just now you spoke Russian perfectly well. You're
no German and you're not a professor! You're a spy and a murderer! Show me
your papers! ' cried Ivan angrily.
The enigmatic professor gave his already crooked mouth a further twist
and shrugged his shoulders.
'Look here, citizen,' put in the horrible choirmaster again. ' What do
you mean by upsetting this foreign tourist? You'll have the police after
you! '

The dubious professor put on a haughty look, turned and walked away
from Ivan, who felt himself beginning to lose his head. Gasping, he turned
to the choirmaster :
'Hey, you, help me arrest this criminal! It's your duty! '
The choirmaster leaped eagerly to his feet and bawled :
'What criminal? Where is he? A foreign criminal? ' His eyes lit up
joyfully. ' That man? If he's a criminal the first thing to do is to shout "
Stop thief! " Otherwise he'll get away. Come on, let's shout together! ' And
the choirmaster opened his mouth wide.
The stupefied Ivan obeyed and shouted ' Stop thief! ' but the
choirmaster fooled him by not making a sound.
Ivan's lonely, hoarse cry was worse than useless. A couple of girls
dodged him and he heard them say ' . .. drunk.'
'So you're in league with him, are you? ' shouted Ivan, helpless with
anger. ' Make fun of me, would you? Out of my way!'
Ivan set off towards his right and the choirmaster did the opposite,
blocking his way. Ivan moved leftward, the other to his right and the same
thing happened.
'Are you trying to get in my way on purpose?' screamed Ivan,
infuriated. ' You're the one I'm going to report to the police!'
Ivan tried to grab the choirmaster by the sleeve, missed and found
himself grasping nothing : it was as if the choirmaster had been swallowed
up by the ground.
With a groan Ivan looked ahead and saw the hated stranger. He had
already reached the exit leading on to Patriarch's Street and he was no
longer alone. The weird choirmaster had managed to join him. But that was
not all. The third member of the company was a cat the size of a pig, black
as soot and with luxuriant cavalry officers' whiskers. The threesome was
walking towards Patriarch's Street, the cat trotting along on its hind legs.
As he set off after the villains Ivan realised at once that it was
going to be very hard to catch them up. In a flash the three of them were
across the street and on the Spiridonovka. Ivan quickened his pace, but the
distance between him and his quarry grew no less. Before the poet had
realised it they had left the quiet Spiridonovka and were approaching Nikita
Gate, where his difficulties increased. There was a crowd and to make
matters worse the evil band had decided to use the favourite trick of
bandits on the run and split up.
With great agility the choirmaster jumped on board a moving bus bound
for Arbat Square and vanished. Having lost one of them, Ivan concentrated
his attention on the cat and saw how the strange animal walked up to the
platform of an ' A ' tram waiting at a stop, cheekily pushed off a screaming
woman, grasped the handrail and offered the conductress a ten-kopeck piece.
Ivan was so amazed by the cat's behaviour that he was frozen into
immobility beside a street corner grocery. He was struck with even greater
amazement as he watched the reaction of the conductress. Seeing the cat
board her tram, she yelled, shaking with anger:
'No cats allowed! I'm not moving with a cat on board! Go on--shoo! Get
off, or I'll call the police! '
Both conductress and passengers seemed completely oblivious of the most
extraordinary thing of all: not that a cat had boarded a tramcar--that was
after all possible--but the fact that the animal was offering to pay its
fare!
The cat proved to be not only a fare-paying but a law-abiding animal.
At the first shriek from the conductress it retreated, stepped off the
platform and sat down at the tram-stop, stroking its whiskers with the
ten-kopeck piece. But no sooner had the conductress yanked the bell-rope and
the car begun to move off, than the cat acted like anyone else who has been
pushed off a tram and is still determined to get to his destination. Letting
all three cars draw past it, the cat jumped on to the coupling-hook of the
last car, latched its paw round a pipe sticking out of one of the windows
and sailed away, having saved itself ten kopecks.
Fascinated by the odious cat, Ivan almost lost sight of the most
important of the three--the professor. Luckily he had not managed to slip
away. Ivan spotted his grey beret in the crowd at the top of Herzen Street.

In a flash Ivan was there too, but in vain. The poet speeded up to a run and
began shoving people aside, but it brought him not an inch nearer the
professor.
Confused though Ivan was, he was nevertheless astounded by the
supernatural speed of the pursuit. Less than twenty seconds after leaving
Nikita Gate Ivan Nikolayich was dazzled by the lights of Arbat Square. A few
more seconds and he was in a dark alleyway with uneven pavements where he
tripped and hurt his knee. Again a well-lit main road--Kropotkin Street-another side-street, then Ostozhenka Street, then another grim, dirty and
badly-lit alley. It was here that Ivan Nikolayich finally lost sight of his
quarry. The professor had disappeared.
Disconcerted, but not for long, for no apparent reason Ivan Nikolayich
had a sudden intuition that the professor must be in house No. 13, flat 47.
Bursting through the front door, Ivan Nikolayich flew up the stairs,
found the right flat and impatiently rang the bell. He did not have to wait
long. The door was opened by a little girl of about five, who silently
disappeared inside again. The hall was a vast, incredibly neglected room
feebly lit by a tiny electric light that dangled in one corner from a
ceiling black with dirt. On the wall hung a bicycle without any tyres,
beneath it a huge iron-banded trunk. On the shelf over the coat-rack was a
winter
fur cap, its long earflaps untied and hanging down. From behind one of
the doors a man's voice could be heard booming from the radio, angrily
declaiming poetry.
Not at all put out by these unfamiliar surroundings, Ivan Nikolayich
made straight for the corridor, thinking to himself:
'He's obviously hiding in the bathroom.' The passage was dark. Bumping
into the walls, Ivan saw a faint streak of light under a doorway. He groped
for the handle and gave it a gentle turn. The door opened and Ivan found
himself in luck--it was the bathroom.
However it wasn't quite the sort of luck he had hoped for. Amid the
damp steam and by the light of the coals smouldering in the geyser, he made
out a large basin attached to the wall and a bath streaked with black where
the enamel had chipped off. There in the bath stood a naked woman, covered
in soapsuds and holding a loofah. She peered short-sightedly at Ivan as he
came in and obviously mistaking him for someone else in the hellish light
she whispered gaily :
'Kiryushka! Do stop fooling! You must be crazy . . . Fyodor Ivanovich
will be back any minute now. Go on--out you go! ' And she waved her loofah
at Ivan.
The mistake was plain and it was, of course, Ivan Nikolayich's fault,
but rather than admit it he gave a shocked cry of ' Brazen hussy! ' and
suddenly found himself in the kitchen. It was empty. In the gloom a silent
row of ten or so Primuses stood on a marble slab. A single ray of moonlight,
struggling through a dirty window that had not been cleaned for years, cast
a dim light into one corner where there hung a forgotten ikon, the stubs of
two candles still stuck in its frame. Beneath the big ikon was another made
of paper and fastened to the wall with tin-tacks.
Nobody knows what came over Ivan but before letting himself out by the
back staircase he stole one of the candles and the little paper ikon.
Clutching these objects he left the strange apartment, muttering,
embarrassed by his recent experience in the bathroom. He could not help
wondering who the shameless Kiryushka might be and whether he was the owner
of the nasty fur cap with dangling ear-flaps.
In the deserted, cheerless alleyway Bezdomny looked round for the
fugitive but there was no sign of him. Ivan said firmly to himself:
'Of course! He's on the Moscow River! Come on! '
Somebody should of course have asked Ivan Nikolayich why he imagined
the professor would be on the Moscow River of all places, but unfortunately
there was no one to ask him--the nasty little alley was completely empty.
In no time at all Ivan Nikolayich was to be seen on the granite steps
of the Moscow lido. Taking off his clothes, Ivan entrusted them to a kindly
old man with a beard, dressed in a torn white Russian blouse and patched,
unlaced boots. Waving him aside, Ivan took a swallow-dive into the water.

The water was so cold that it took his breath away and for a moment he even
doubted whether he would reach the surface again. But reach it he did, and
puffing and snorting, his eyes round with terror, Ivan Nikolayich began
swimming in the black, oily-smelling water towards the shimmering zig-zags
of the embankment lights reflected in the water.
When Ivan clambered damply up the steps at the place where he had left
his clothes in the care of the bearded man, not only his clothes but their
venerable guardian had apparently been spirited away. On the very spot where
the heap of clothes had been there was now a pair of check underpants, a
torn Russian blouse, a candle, a paper ikon and a box of matches. Shaking
his fist into space with impotent rage, Ivan clambered into what was left.
As he did so two thoughts worried him. To begin with he had now lost
his MASSOLIT membership card; normally he never went anywhere without it.
Secondly it occurred to him that he might be arrested for walking around
Moscow in this state. After all, he had practically nothing on but a pair of
underpants. . . .
Ivan tore the buttons off the long underpants where they were fastened
at the ankles, in the hope that people might think they were a pair of
lightweight summer trousers. He then picked up the ikon, the candle and
matches and set off, saying to himself:
'I must go to Griboyedov! He's bound to be there.' Ivan Nikolayich's
fears were completely justified--passers-by noticed him and turned round to
stare, so he decided to leave the main streets and make Us way through the
side-roads where people were not so inquisitive, where there was less chance
of them stopping a barefoot man and badgering him with questions about his
underpants--which obstinately refused to look like trousers.
Ivan plunged into a maze of sidestreets round the Arbat and began to
sidle along the walls, blinking fearfully, glancing round, occasionally
hiding in doorways, avoiding crossroads with traffic lights and the elegant
porticos of embassy mansions.

5. The Affair at Griboyedov

It was an old two-storied house, painted cream, that stood on the ring
boulevard behind a ragged garden, fenced off from the pavement by
wrought-iron railings. In winter the paved front courtyard was usually full
of shovelled snow, whilst in summer, shaded by a canvas awning, it became a
delightful outdoor extension to the club restaurant.
The house was called ' Griboyedov House ' because it might once have
belonged to an aunt of the famous playwright Alexander Sergeyevich
Griboyedov. Nobody really knows for sure whether she ever owned it or not.
People even say that Griboyedov never had an aunt who owned any such
property. . . . Still, that was its name. What is more, a dubious tale used
to circulate in Moscow of how in the round, colonnaded salon on the second
floor the famous writer had once read extracts from Woe From Wit to that
same aunt as she reclined on a sofa. Perhaps he did ; in any case it doesn't
matter.
It matters much more that this house now belonged to MASSOLIT, which
until his excursion to Patriarch's Ponds was headed by the unfortunate
Mikhail Alexandrovich Berlioz. No one, least of all the members of MASSOLIT,
called the place ' Griboyedov House '. Everyone simply called it' Griboyedov
':
'I spent a couple of hours lobbying at Griboyedov yesterday.'
'Well?'
'Wangled myself a month in Yalta.'
'Good for you! '
Or : ' Go to Berlioz--he's seeing people from four to five this
afternoon at Griboyedov . . .'--and so on.

MASSOLIT had installed itself in Griboyedov very comfortably indeed. As
you entered you were first confronted with a notice-board full of
announcements by the various sports clubs, then with the photographs of
every individual member of MASSOLIT, who were strung up (their photographs,
of course) along the walls of the staircase leading to the first floor.
On the door of the first room on the upper storey was a large notice :
' Angling and Weekend Cottages ', with a picture of a carp caught on a hook.
On the door of the second room was a slightly confusing notice: '
Writers' day-return rail warrants. Apply to M.V. Podlozhnaya.'
The next door bore a brief and completely incomprehensible legend: '
Perelygino'. From there the chance visitor's eye would be caught by
countless more notices pinned to the aunt's walnut doors : ' Waiting List
for Paper--Apply to Poklevkina ';
'Cashier's Office '; ' Sketch-Writers : Personal Accounts ' . . .
At the head of the longest queue, which started downstairs at the
porter's desk, was a door under constant siege labelled ' Housing Problem'.
Past the housing problem hung a gorgeous poster showing a cliff, along
whose summit rode a man on a chestnut horse with a rifle slung over his
shoulder. Below were some palm-trees and a balcony. On it sat a shock-haired
young man gazing upwards with a bold, urgent look and holding a fountain pen
in his hands. The wording read : ' All-in Writing Holidays, from two weeks
(short story, novella) to one year (novel, trilogy): Yalta, Suuk-Su,
Borovoye, Tsikhidziri, Makhinjauri, Leningrad (Winter Palace).' There was a
queue at this door too, but not an excessively long one--only about a
hundred and fifty people.
Following the erratic twists, the steps up and steps down of
Griboyedov's corridors, one found other notices : 'MASSOLIT-Management',
'Cashiers Nos. 2, 5, 4, 5,' 'Editorial Board', ' MASSOLIT-Chairman',
'Billiard Room', then various subsidiary organisations and finally that
colonnaded salon where the aunt had listened with such delight to the
readings of his comedy by her brilliant nephew.
Every visitor to Griboyedov, unless of course he were completely
insensitive, was made immediately aware of how good life was for the lucky
members of MASSOLIT and he would at once be consumed with black envy. At
once, too, he would curse heaven for having failed to endow him at birth
with literary talent, without which, of course, no one could so much as
dream of acquiring a MASSOLIT membership card--that brown card known to all
Moscow, smelling of expensive leather and embellished with a wide gold
border.
Who is prepared to say a word in defence of envy? It is a despicable
emotion, but put yourself in the visitor's place : what he had seen on the
upper flоог was by no means all. The entire ground floor of the aunt's house
was occupied by a restaurant-- and what a restaurant! It was rightly
considered the best in Moscow. Not only because it occupied two large rooms
with vaulted ceilings and lilac-painted horses with flowing manes, not only
because every table had a lamp shaded with lace, not only because it was
barred to the hoi polloi, but above all for the quality of its food.
Griboyedov could beat any restaurant in Moscow you cared to name and its
prices were extremely moderate.
There is therefore nothing odd in the conversation which the author of
these lines actually overheard once outside the iron railings of Griboyedov
:
'Where are you dining today, Ambrose? '
'What a question! Here, of course, Vanya! Archibald Archibaldovich
whispered to me this morning that there's filets de perche an naturel on the
menu tonight. Sheer virtuosity! '
'You do know how to live, Ambrose! ' sighed Vanya, a thin pinched man
with a carbuncle on his neck, to Ambrose, a strapping, red-lipped,
golden-haired, ruddy-cheeked poet.
'It's no special talent,' countered Ambrose. ' Just a perfectly normal
desire to live a decent, human existence. Now I suppose you're going to say
that you can get perch at the Coliseum. So you can. But a helping of perch
at the Coliseum costs thirty roubles fifty kopecks and here it costs five
fifty! Apart from that the perch at the Coliseum are three days old and

what's more if you go to the Coliseum there's no guarantee you won't get a
bunch of grapes thrown in your face by the first young man to burst in from
Theatre Street. No, I loathe the Coliseum,' shouted Ambrose the gastronome
at the top of his voice. ' Don't try and talk me into liking it, Vanya! '
'I'm not trying to talk you into it, Ambrose,' squeaked Vanya. ' You
might have been dining at home.'
'Thank you very much,' trumpeted Ambrose. ' Just imagine your wife
trying to cook filets de perche an naturel in a saucepan, in the kitchen you
share with half a dozen other people! He, he, he! ... Aurevoir, Vanya! ' And
humming to himself Ambrose hurried oft to the verandah under the awning.
Ha, ha, ha! ... Yes, that's how it used to be! ... Some of us old
inhabitants of Moscow still remember the famous Griboyedov. But boiled
fillets of perch was nothing, my dear Ambrose! What about the sturgeon,
sturgeon in a silver-plated pan, sturgeon filleted and served between
lobsters' tails and fresh caviar? And oeufs en cocotte with mushroom puree
in little bowls? And didn't you like the thrushes' breasts? With truffles?
The quails alia Genovese? Nine roubles fifty! And oh, the band, the polite
waiters! And in July when the whole family's in the country and pressing
literary business is keeping you in town--out on the verandah, in the shade
of a climbing vine, a plate of potage printaniere looking like a golden
stain on the snow-white table-cloth? Do you remember, Ambrose? But of course
you do--I can see from your lips you remember. Not just your salmon or your
perch either--what about the snipe, the woodcock in season, the quail, the
grouse? And the sparkling wines! But I digress, reader.
At half past ten on the evening that Berlioz died at Patriarch's Ponds,
only one upstairs room at Griboyedov was lit. In it sat twelve weary
authors, gathered for a meeting and still waiting for Mikhail Alexandrovich.
Sitting on chairs, on tables and even on the two window ledges, the
management committee of MASSOLIT was suffering badly from the heat and
stuffiness. Not a single fresh breeze penetrated the open window. Moscow was
The Master and Margarita
exuding the heat of the day accumulated in its asphalt and it was
obvious that the night was not going to bring; any relief. There was a smell
of onion coming from the restaurant kitchen in the cellar, everybody wanted
a drink, everybody was nervous and irritable.
Beskudnikov, a quiet, well-dressed essayist with eyes that were at once
attentive yet shifty, took out his watch. The hands were just creeping up to
eleven. Beskudnikov tapped the watch face with his finger and showed it to
his neighbour, the poet Dvubratsky, who was sitting on the table, bored and
swinging his feet shod in yellow rubber-soled slippers.
'Well, really . . .' muttered Dvubratsky.
'I suppose the lad's got stuck out at Klyazma,' said Nastasya
Lukinishna Nepremenova, orphaned daughter of a Moscow business man, who had
turned writer and wrote naval war stories under the pseudonym of ' Bo'sun
George '.
'Look here! ' burst out Zagrivov, a writer of popular short stories. '
I don't know about you, but I'd rather be drinking tea out on the balcony
right now instead of stewiing in here. Was this meeting called for ten
o'clock or wasn't it? '
'It must be nice out at Klyazma now,' said IBo'sun George in a tone of
calculated innocence, knowing that the writers' summer colony out at
Perelygino near Klyazma was a sore point. ' I expect the nightingales are
singing there now. Somehow I always seem to work better out of town,
especially in the spring.'
'I've been paying my contributions for three years now to send my sick
wife to that paradise but somehow nothing ever appears on the horizon,' said
Hieronymus Poprikhin the novelist, with bitter venom.
'Some people are lucky and others aren't, that's all,' boomed the
critic Ababkov from the window-ledge.
Bos'un George's little eyes lit up, and softening her contralto rasp
she said:
'We mustn't be jealous, comrades. There are only twenty-two dachas,
only seven more are being built, and there are three thousand of us in
MASSOLIT.'

'Three thousand one hundred and eleven,' put in someone from a corner.
'Well, there you are,' the Bo'sun went on. ' What can one do?
Naturally the dachas are allocated to those with the most talent. . .'
'They're allocated to the people at the top! ' barked Gluk-haryov, a
script writer.
Beskudnikov, yawning artificially, left the room.
'One of them has five rooms to himself at Perelygino,' Glukharyov
shouted after him.
'Lavrovich has six rooms to himself,' shouted Deniskin, ' and the
dining-room's panelled in oak! '
'Well, at the moment that's not the point,' boomed Ababkov. ' The
point is that it's half past eleven.'
A noise began, heralding mutiny. Somebody rang up the hated Perelygino
but got through to the wrong dacha, which turned out to belong to Lavrovich,
where they were told that Lavrovich was out on the river. This produced
utter confusion. Somebody made a wild telephone call to the Fine Arts and
Literature Commission, where of course there was no reply.
'He might have rung up! ' shouted Deniskin, Glukharyov and Quant.
Alas, they shouted in vain. Mikhail Alexandrovich was in no state to
telephone anyone. Far, far from Griboyedov, in a vast hall lit by
thousand-candle-power lamps, what had recently been Mikhail Alexandrovich
was lying on three zinc-topped tables. On the first was the naked,
blood-caked body with. a fractured arm and smashed rib-cage, on the second
the head, it;s front teeth knocked in, its vacant open eyes undisturbed by
the blinding light, and on the third--a heap of mangled rags. Round the
decapitated corpse stood the professor of forensic medicine, the
pathological anatomist and his dissector, a few detectives and Mikhail
Alexandrovich's deputy as chairman of MASSOLIT, the writer Zheldybin,
summoned by telephone from the bedside of his sick wife.
A car had been sent for Zheldybin and had first taken him and the
detectives (it was about midnight) to the dead man's flat where his papers
were placed under seal, after which they all drove to the morgue.
The group round the remains of the deceased were conferring on the best
course to take--should they sew the severed head back on to the neck or
allow the body to lie in state in the main hall of Griboyedov covered by a
black cloth as far as the chin?
Yes, Mikhail Alexandrovich was quite incapable of telephoning and
Deniskin, Glukharyov, Quant and Beskudnikov were exciting themselves for
nothing. On the stroke of midnight all twelve writers left the upper storey
and went down to the restaurant. There they said more unkind things about
Mikhail Alexandrovich : all the tables on the verandah were full and they
were obliged to dine in the beautiful but stifling indoor rooms.
On the stroke of midnight the first of these rooms suddenly woke up and
leaped into life with a crash and a roar. A thin male voice gave a desperate
shriek of ' Alleluia!! ' Music. It was the famous Griboyedov jazz band
striking up. Sweat-covered faces lit up, the painted horses on the ceiling
came to life, the lamps seemed to shine brighter. Suddenly, as though
bursting their chains, everybody in the two rooms started dancing, followed
by everybody on the verandah.
Glukharyov danced away with the poetess Tamara Polumesy-atz. Quant
danced, Zhukopov the novelist seized a film actress in a yellow dress and
danced. They all danced--Dragunsky and Cherdakchi danced, little Deniskin
danced with the gigantic Bo'sun George and the beautiful girl architect
Semeikin-Hall was grabbed by a stranger in white straw-cloth trousers.
Members and guests, from Moscow and from out of town, they all danced--the
writer Johann from Kronstadt, a producer called Vitya Kuftik from Rostov
with lilac-coloured eczema all over his face, the leading lights of the
poetry section of MASSOLIT-- Pavianov, Bogokhulsky, Sladky, Shpichkin and
Adelfina Buzdyak, young men of unknown occupation with cropped hair and
shoulders padded with cotton wool, an old, old man with a chive sticking out
of his beard danced with a thin, anaemic girl in an orange silk dress.
Pouring sweat, the waiters carried dripping mugs of beer over the
dancers' heads, yelling hoarsely and venomously ' Sorry, sir! ' Somewhere a
man bellowed through a megaphone:

'Chops once! Kebab twice! Chicken a la King! ' The vocalist was no
longer singing--he was howling. Now and again the crash of cymbals in the
band drowned the noise of dirty crockery flung down a sloping chute to the
scullery. In short--hell.
At midnight there appeared a vision in this hell. On to the verandah
strode a handsome, black-eyed man with a pointed beard and wearing a tail
coat. With regal gaze he surveyed his domain. According to some romantics
there had once been a time when this noble figure had worn not tails but a
broad leather belt round his waist, stuck with pistol-butts, that his
raven-black hair had been tied up in a scarlet kerchief and that his brig
had sailed the Caribbean under the Jolly Roger.
But that, of course, is pure fantasy--the Caribbean doesn't exist, no
desperate buccaneers sail it, no corvette ever chases them, no puffs of
cannon-smoke ever roll across the waves. Pure invention. Look at that
scraggy tree, look at the iron railings, the boulevard. . . . And the ice is
floating in the wine-bucket and at the next table there's a man with
ox-like, bloodshot eyes and it's pandemonium. . . . Oh gods--poison, I need
poison! . . .
Suddenly from one of the tables the word ' Berlioz!! ' flew up and
exploded in the air. Instantly the band collapsed and stopped, as though
someone had punched it. ' What, what, what--what?!! '
'Berlioz!!! '
Everybody began rushing about and screaming.
A wave of grief surged up at the terrible news about Mikhail
Alexandrovich. Someone fussed around shouting that they must all
immediately, here and now, without delay compose a collective telegram and
send it off.
But what telegram, you may ask? And why send it? Send it where? And
what use is a telegram to the man whose battered skull is being mauled by
the rubber hands of a dissector, whose neck is being pierced by the
professor's crooked needles? He's dead, he doesn't want a telegram. It's all
over, let's not overload the post office.
Yes, he's dead . . . but we are still alive!
The wave of grief rose, lasted for a while and then began to recede.
Somebody went back to their table and--furtively to begin with, then
openly--drank a glass of vodka and took a bite to eat. After all, what's the
point of wasting the cotelettes de volatile? What good are we going to do
Mikhail Alexandrovich by going hungry? We're still alive, aren't we?
Naturally the piano was shut and locked, the band went home and a few
journalists left for their newspaper offices to write obituaries. The news
spread that Zheldybin was back from the morgue. He moved into Berlioz's
upstairs office and at once a rumour started that he was going to take over
from Berlioz. Zheldybin summoned all twelve members of the management
committee from the restaurant and in an emergency session they began
discussing such urgent questions as the preparation of the colonnaded hall,
the transfer of the body from the morgue, the times at which members could
attend the lying-in-state and other matters connected with the tragic event.
Downstairs in the restaurant life had returned to normal and would have
continued on its usual nocturnal course until closing time at four, had not
something quite abnormal occurred which shocked the diners considerably more
than the news of Berlioz's death.
The first to be alarmed were the cab drivers waiting outside the gates
of Griboyedov. Jerking up with a start one of them shouted:
'Hey! Look at that!' A little glimmer flared up near the iron railings
and started to bob towards the verandah. Some of the diners stood up, stared
and saw that the nickering light was accompanied by a white apparition. As
it approached the verandah trellis every diner froze, eyes bulging,
sturgeon-laden forks motionless in mid-air. The club porter, who at that
moment had just left the restaurant cloakroom to go outside for a smoke,
stubbed out his cigarette and was just going to advance on the apparition
with the aim of barring its way into the restaurant when for some reason he
changed his mind, stopped and grinned stupidly.
The apparition, passing through an opening in the trellis, mounted the
verandah unhindered. As it did so everyone saw that this was no apparition

but the distinguished poet Ivan Nikolayich Bezdomny.
He was barefoot and wearing a torn, dirty white Russian blouse. To its
front was safety-pinned a paper ikon with a picture of some unknown saint.
He was wearing long white underpants with a lighted candle in his hand and
his right cheek bore a fresh scratch. It would be hard to fathom the depth
of the silence which reigned on the verandah. Beer poured on to the floor
from a mug held sideways by one of the waiters.
The poet raised the candle above his head and said in a loud voice :
'Greetings, friends!' He then looked under the nearest table and
exclaimed with disappointment:
'No, he's not there.'
Two voices were heard. A bass voice said pitilessly : ' An obvious case
of D.Ts.'
The second, a frightened woman's voice enquired nervously :
'How did the police let him on to the streets in that state? '
Ivan Nikolayich heard this and replied :
'They tried to arrest me twice, once in Skatertny Street and once here
on Bronnaya, but I climbed over the fence and that's how I scratched my
cheek! ' Ivan Nikolayich lifted up his candle and shouted: ' Fellow
artists!' (His squeaky voice grew stronger and more urgent.) ' Listen to me,
all of you! He's come! Catch him at once or he'll do untold harm! '
'What's that? What? What did he say? Who's come? ' came the questions
from all sides.
'A professor,' answered Ivan, ' and it was this professor who killed
Misha Berlioz this evening at Patriarch's.'
By now people were streaming on to the verandah from the indoor rooms
and a crowd began milling round Ivan.
'I beg your pardon, would you say that again more clearly? ' said a
low, courteous voice right beside Ivan Nikolayich's ear. ' Tell me, how was
he killed? Who killed him? '
'A foreigner--he's a professor and a spy,' replied Ivan, looking
round.
'What's his name? ' said the voice again into his ear.
'That's just the trouble!' cried Ivan in frustration. ' If only I knew
his name! I couldn't read it properly on his visiting card ... I only
remember the letter ' W '--the name began with a ' W '. What could it have
been? ' Ivan asked himself aloud, clutching his forehead with his hand. '
We, wi, wa . . . wo . . . Walter? Wagner? Weiner? Wegner? Winter? ' The
hairs on Ivan's head started to stand on end from the effort.
'Wolff? ' shouted a woman, trying to help him.
Ivan lost his temper.
'You fool!' he shouted, looking for the woman in the crowd. ' What's
Wolff got to do with it? He didn't do it ... Wo, wa . . . No, I'll never
remember it like this. Now look, everybody-- ring up the police at once and
tell them to send five motorcycles and sidecars with machine-guns to catch
the professor. And don't forget to say that there are two others with him--a
tall fellow in checks with a wobbly pince-nez and a great black cat. . . .
Meanwhile I'm going to search Griboyedov--I can sense that he's here! '
Ivan was by now in a state of some excitement. Pushing the bystanders
aside he began waving his candle about, pouring wax on himself, and started
to look under the tables. Then somebody said ' Doctor! ' and a fat, kindly
face, clean-shaven, smelling of drink and with horn-rimmed spectacles,
appeared in front of Ivan.
'Comrade Bezdomny,' said the face solemnly, ' calm down! You're upset
by the death of our beloved Mikhail Alexandrovich . . . no, I mean plain
Misha Berlioz. We all realise how you feel. You need rest. You'll be taken
home to bed in a moment and then you can relax and forget all about it. . .'
'Don't you realise,' Ivan interrupted, scowling, ' that we've got to
catch the professor? And all you can do is come creeping up to me talking
all this rubbish! Cretin! '
'Excuse me. Comrade Bezdomny! ' replied the face, blushing, retreating
and already wishing it had never let itself get involved in this affair.
'No, I don't care who you are--I won't excuse you,' said Ivan
Nikolayich with quiet hatred.

A spasm distorted his face, he rapidly switched the candle from his
right to his left hand, swung his arm and punched the sympathetic face on
the ear.
Several people reached the same conclusion at once and hurled
themselves at Ivan. The candle went out, the horn-rims fell off the face and
were instantly smashed underfoot. Ivan let out a dreadful war-whoop audible,
to everybody's embarrassment, as far as the boulevard, and began to defend
himself. There came a tinkle of breaking crockery, women screamed.
While the waiters tied up the poet with dish-cloths, a conversation was
in progress in the cloakroom between the porter and the captain of the brig.
'Didn't you see that he was wearing underpants? ' asked the pirate
coldly.
'But Archibald Archibaldovich--I'm a coward,' replied the porter, '
how could I stop him from coming in? He's a member!'
'Didn't you see that he was wearing underpants? ' repeated the pirate.
'Please, Archibald Archibaldovich,--' said the porter, turning purple,
' what could I do? I know there are ladies on the ver-andah, but...'
'The ladies don't matter. They don't mind,' replied the pirate,
roasting the porter with his glare. ' But the police mind! There's only one
way a man can walk round Moscow in his underwear--when he's being escorted
by the police on the way to a police station! And you, if you call yourself
a porter, ought to know that if you see a man in that state it's your duty
not to waste a moment but to start blowing your whistle I Do you hear? Can't
you hear what's happening on the verandah? '
The wretched porter could hear the sounds of smashing crockery, groans
and women's screams from the verandah only too well.
'Now what do you propose to do about it? ' enquired the buccaneer.
The skin on the porter's face took on a leprous shade and his eyes went
blank. It seemed to him that the other man's black hair, now neatly parted,
was covered by a fiery silk kerchief. Starched shirtfront and tail-coat
vanished, a pistol was sticking out of his leather belt. The porter saw
himself dangling from the foretop yard-arm, his tongue protruding from his
lifeless, drooping head. He could even hear the waves lapping against the
ship's side. The porter's knees trembled. But the buccaneer took pity on him
and switched off his terrifying glare.
'All right, Nikolai--but mind it never happens again! We can't have
porters like you in a restaurant--you'd better go and be a verger in a
church.' Having said this the captain gave a few rapid, crisp, clear orders:
' Send the barman. Police. Statement. Car. Mental hospital.' And he added :
'Whistle!'
A quarter of an hour later, to the astonishment of the people in the
restaurant, on the boulevard and at the windows of the surrounding houses,
the barman, the porter, a policeman, a waiter and the poet Ryukhin were to
be seen emerging from the gates of Griboyedov dragging a young man trussed
up like a mummy, who was weeping, spitting, lashing out at Ryukhin and
shouting for the whole street to hear :
'You swine! . . . You swine! . . . '
A buzzing crowd collected, discussing the incredible scene. It was of
course an abominable, disgusting, thrilling, revolting scandal which only
ended when a lorry drove away from the gates of Griboyedov carrying the
unfortunate Ivan Nikolayich, the policeman, the barman and Ryukhin.

6. Schizophrenia

At half past one in the morning a man with a pointed beard and wearing
a white overall entered the reception hall of a famous psychiatric clinic
recently completed in the suburbs of Moscow. Three orderlies and the poet
Ryukhin stood nervously watching Ivan Nikolayich as he sat on a divan. The
dish-cloths that had been used to pinion Ivan Nikolayich now lay in a heap

on the same divan, leaving his arms and legs free.
As the man came in Ryukhin turned pale, coughed and said timidly:
'Good morning, doctor.'
The doctor bowed to Ryukhin but looked at Ivan Nikolayich, who was
sitting completely immobile and scowling furiously. He did not even move
when the doctor appeared.
'This, doctor,' began Ryukhin in a mysterious whisper, glancing
anxiously at Ivan Nikolayich, ' is the famous poet Ivan Bezdomny. We're
afraid he may have D.Ts.'
'Has he been drinking heavily? ' enquired the doctor through clenched
teeth.
'No, he's had a few drinks, but not enough . . .'
'Has he been trying to catch spiders, rats, little devils or dogs? '
'No,' replied Ryukhin, shuddering. ' I saw him yesterday and this
morning ... he was perfectly well then.'
'Why is he in his underpants? Did you have to pull him out of bed?'
'He came into a restaurant like this, doctor'
'Aha, aha,' said the doctor in a tone of great satisfaction. ' And why
the scratches? Has he been fighting? '
'He fell off the fence and then he hit someone in the restaurant , . .
and someone else, too . . .' ' I see, I see, I see,' said the doctor and
added, turning to Ivan :
'Good morning! '
'Hello, you quack! ' said Ivan, loudly and viciously.
Ryukhin was so embarrassed that he dared not raise his eyes. The
courteous doctor, however, showed no signs of offence and with a practised
gesture took off his spectacles, lifted the skirt of his overall, put them
in his hip pocket and then asked Ivan:
'How old are you? '
'Go to hell! ' shouted Ivan rudely and turned away.
'Why are you being so disagreeable? Have I said anything to upset
you?'
'I'm twenty-three,' said Ivan excitedly, ' and I'm going to lodge a
complaint against all of you--and you in particular, you louse! ' He spat at
Ryukhin.
'What will your complaint be? '
'That you arrested me, a perfectly healthy man, and forcibly dragged
me off to the madhouse! ' answered Ivan in fury.
At this Ryukhin took a close look at Ivan and felt a chill down his
spine : there was not a trace of insanity in the man's eyes. They had been
slightly clouded at Griboyedov, but now they were as clear as before.
'Godfathers! ' thought Ryukhin in terror. ' He really is perfectly
normal! What a ghastly business! Why have we brought him here? There's
nothing the matter with him except a few scratches on his face . . .'
'You are not,' said the doctor calmly, sitting down on a stool on a
single chromium-plated stalk, ' in a madhouse but in a clinic, where nobody
is going to keep you if it isn't necessary.' Ivan gave him a suspicious
scowl, but muttered :
'Thank God for that! At last I've found one normal person among all
these idiots and the worst idiot of the lot is that incompetent fraud Sasha!
'
'Who is this incompetent Sasha? ' enquired the doctor. ' That's him,
Ryukhin,' replied Ivan, jabbing a dirty finger in
Ryukhin's direction, who spluttered in protest. ' That's all the thanks
I get,' he thought bitterly, ' for showing him some sympathy! What a
miserable swine he is! '
* A typical kulak mentality,' said Ivan Nikolayich, who obviously felt
a sudden urge to attack Ryukhin. ' And what's more he's a kulak masquerading
as a proletarian. Look at his mean face and compare it with all that pompous
verse he writes for May Day ... all that stuff about "onwards and upwards"
and "banners waving "! If you could look inside him and see what he's
thinking you'd be sickened! ' And Ivan Nikolayich gave a hoot of malicious
laughter.
Ryukhin, breathing heavily, turned red. There was only one thought in

his mind--that he had nourished a serpent in his bosom, that he had tried to
help someone who when it came to the pinch had treacherously rounded on him.
The worst of it was that he could not answer back--one mustn't swear at a
lunatic!
'Exactly why have they brought you here? ' asked the doctor, who had
listened to Bezdomny's outburst with great attention.
'God knows, the blockheads! They grabbed me, tied me up with some
filthy rags and dumped me in a lorry!'
'May I ask why you came into the restaurant in nothing but your
underwear?'
'There's nothing odd about it,' answered Ivan. ' I went for a swim in
the Moscow River and someone pinched my clothes and left me this junk
instead! I couldn't walk round Moscow naked, could I? I had to put on what
there was, because I was in a hurry to get to the Griboyedov restaurant.'
The doctor glanced questioningly at Ryukhin, who mumbled sulkily:
'Yes, that's the name of the restaurant.'
'Aha,' said the doctor, ' but why were you in such a hurry? Did you
have an appointment there? '
'I had to catch the professor,' replied Ivan Nikolayich, glancing
nervously round.
'What professor? ' ' Do you know Berlioz? ' asked Ivan with a meaning
look.
'You mean . . . the composer? '
Ivan looked puzzled. ' What composer? Oh, yes . . . no, no. The
composer just happens to have the same name as Misha Berlioz.'
Ryukhin was still feeling too offended to speak, but he had to explain:
'Berlioz, the chairman of MASSOLIT, was run over by a tram this
evening at Patriarch's.'
'Don't lie, you--you don't know anything about it,' Ivan burst out at
Ryukhin. ' I was there, not you! He made him fall under that tram on
purpose! '
'Did he push him? '
'What are you talking about?' exclaimed Ivan, irritated by his
listener's failure to grasp the situation. ' He didn't have to push him! He
can do things you'd never believe! He knew in advance that Berlioz was going
to fall under a tram! '
'Did anybody see this professor apart from you? '
'No, that's the trouble. Only Berlioz and myself.'
'I see. What steps did you take to arrest this murderer?' At this
point the doctor turned and threw a glance at a woman in a white overall
sitting behind a desk.
'This is what I did : I took this candle from the kitchen . . .'
'This one? ' asked the doctor, pointing to a broken candle lying on
the desk beside the ikon.
'Yes, that's the one, and . . .'
'Why the ikon? '
'Well, er, the ikon. . . .' Ivan blushed. ' You see an ikon frightens
them more than anything else.' He again pointed at Ryukhin. ' But the fact
is that the professor is ... well, let's be frank . . . he's in league with
the powers of evil . . . and it's not so easy to catch someone like him.'
The orderlies stretched their hands down their trouser-seams and stared
even harder at Ivan.
'Yes,' went on Ivan. ' He's in league with them. There's no arguing
about it. He once talked to Pontius Pilate. It's no good looking at me like
that, I'm telling you the truth! He saw it all --the balcony, the palm
trees. He was actually with Pontius Pilate, I'll swear it.'
'Well, now . . .'
'So, as I was saying, I pinned the ikon to my chest and ran .,.'
Here the clock struck twice.
'Oh, my God! ' exclaimed Ivan and rose from the divan. ' It's two
o'clock and here am I wasting time talking to you! Would you mind--where's
the telephone? '
'Show him the telephone,' the doctor said to the orderlies.
As Ivan grasped the receiver the woman quietly asked Ryukhin:

'Is he married? '
'No, he's a bachelor,' replied Ryukhin, startled.
'Is he a union member? '
'Yes.'
'Police? ' shouted Ivan into the mouthpiece. ' Police? Is that the
duty officer? Sergeant, please arrange to send five motor cycles with
sidecars, armed with machine-guns to arrest the foreign professor. What?
Take me with you, I'll show you where to go. . . . This is Bezdomny, I'm a
poet, and I'm speaking from the lunatic asylum. . . . What's your address? '
Bezdomny whispered to the doctor, covering the mouthpiece with his palm, and
then yelled back into the receiver: ' Are you listening? Hullo! . . . Fools!
. . .' Ivan suddenly roared, hurling the receiver at the wall. Then he
turned round to the doctor, offered him his hand, said a curt goodbye and
started to go.
'Excuse me, but where are you proposing to go?' said the doctor,
looking Ivan in the eye. ' At this hour of night, in your underwear . . .
You're not well, stay with us.'
'Come on, let me through,' said Ivan to the orderlies who had lined up
to block the doorway. ' Are you going to let me go or not? ' shouted the
poet in a terrible voice.
Ryukhin shuddered. The woman pressed a button on the desk ; a
glittering metal box and a sealed ampoule popped out on to its glass
surface.
'Ah, so that's your game, is it? ' said Ivan with a wild, hunted
glance around. ' All right then . . . Goodbye!! ' And he threw himself head
first at the shuttered window.
There was a loud crash, but the glass did not even crack, and a moment
later Ivan Nikolayich was struggling in the arms of the orderlies. He
screamed, tried to bite, then shouted :
'Fine sort of glass you put in your windows! Let me go! Let me go! '
A hypodermic syringe glittered in the doctor's hand, with one sweep the
woman pushed back the tattered sleeve of Ivan's blouse and clamped his arm
in a most un-feminine grip. There was a smell of ether, Ivan weakened
slightly in the grasp of the four men and the doctor skilfully seized the
moment to jab the needle into Ivan's arm. Ivan kept up the struggle for a
few more seconds, then collapsed on to the divan.
'Bandits! ' cried Ivan and leaped up, only to be pushed back. As soon
as they let him go he jumped up again, but sat down of his own accord. He
said nothing, staring wildly about him, then gave a sudden unexpected yawn
and smiled malevolently :
'So you're going to lock me up after all,' he said, yawned again, lay
down with his head on the cushion, his fist under his cheek like a child and
muttered in a sleepy voice but without malice : ' All right, then . . . but
you'll pay for it ... I warned you, but if you want to ... What interests me
most now is Pontius Pilate . . . Pilate . . .' And with that he closed his
eyes.
'Vanna, put him in No. 117 by himself and with someone to watch him.'
The doctor gave his instructions and replaced his spectacles. Then Ryukhin
shuddered again : a pair of white doors opened without a sound and beyond
them stretched a corridor lit by a row of blue night-bulbs. Out of the
corridor rolled a couch on rubber wheels. The sleeping Ivan was lifted on to
it, he was pushed off down the corridor and the doors closed after him.
'Doctor,' asked the shaken Ryukhin in a whisper, ' is he really ill?'
'Oh yes,' replied the doctor.
'Then what's the matter with him?' enquired Rvukhin timidly.
The exhausted doctor looked at Ryukhin and answered wearily:
'Overstimulation of the motor nerves and speech centres . . .
delirious illusions. . . . Obviously a complicated case. Schizophrenia, I
should think . . . touch of alcoholism, too. . . .'
Ryukhin understood nothing of this, except that Ivan Nikolayich was
obviously in poor shape. He sighed and asked :
'What was that he said about some professor? '
'I expect he saw someone who gave a shock to his disturbed
imagination. Or maybe it was a hallucination. . . .'

A few minutes later a lorry was taking Ryukhin back into Moscow. Dawn
was breaking and the still-lit street lamps seemed superfluous and
unpleasant. The driver, annoyed at missing a night's sleep, pushed his lorry
as hard as it would go, making it skid round the corners.
The woods fell away in the distance and the river wandered off in
another direction. As the lorry drove on the scenery slowly changed: fences,
a watchman's hut, piles of logs, dried and split telegraph poles with
bobbins strung on the wires between them, heaps of stones, ditches--in
short, a feeling that Moscow was about to appear round the next corner and
would rise up and engulf them at any moment.
The log of wood on which Ryukhin was sitting kept wobbling and
slithering about and now and again it tried to slide away from under him
altogether. The restaurant dish-cloths, which the policeman and the barman
had thrown on to the back of the lorry before leaving earlier by
trolley-bus, were being flung about all over the back of the lorry. Ryukhin
started to try and pick them up, but with a sudden burst of ill-temper he
hissed :
'To hell with them! Why should I crawl around after them? ' He pushed
them away with his foot and turned away from them.
Ryukhin was in a state of depression. It was obvious that his visit to
the asylum had affected him deeply. He tried to think what it was that was
disturbing him. Was it the corridor with its blue lamps, which had lodged so
firmly in his memory? Was it the thought that the worst misfortune in the
world was to lose one's reason? Yes, it was that, of course--but that after
all was a generalisation, it applied to everybody. There was something else,
though. What was it? The insult--that was it. Yes, those insulting words
that Bezdomny had flung into his face. And the agony of it was not that they
were insulting but that they were true.
The poet stopped looking about him and instead stared gloomily at the
dirty, shaking floor of the lorry in an agony of self-reproach.
Yes, his poetry . . . He was thirty-two! And what were his prospects?
To go on writing a few poems every year. How long--until he was an old man?
Yes, until he was an old man. What would these poems do for him? Make him
famous? ' What rubbish! Don't fool yourself. Nobody ever gets famous from
writing bad poetry. Why is it bad, though? He was right --he was telling the
truth! ' said Ryukhin pitilessly to himself. I don't believe in a single
word of what I've written . . .! '
Embittered by an upsurge of neurasthenia, the poet swayed. The floor
beneath had stopped shaking. Ryukhin lifted his head and saw that he was in
the middle of Moscow, that day had dawned, that his lorry had stopped in a
traffic-jam at a boulevard intersection and that right near him stood a
metal man on a plinth, his head inclined slightly forward, staring blankly
down the street.
Strange thoughts assailed the poet, who was beginning to feel ill. '
Now there's an example of pure luck .'--Ryukhin stood up on the lorry's
platform and raised his fist in an inexplicable urge to attack the harmless
cast-iron man--'. . . everything he did in life, whatever happened to him,
it all went his way, everything conspired to make him famous! But what did
he achieve? I've never been able to discover . . . What about that famous
phrase of his that begins " A storm of mist. . ."? What a load of rot! He
was lucky, that's all, just lucky! '--Ryukhin concluded venomously, feeling
the lorry start to move under him--' and just because that White officer
shot at him and smashed his hip, he's famous for ever . . .'
The jam was moving. Less than two minutes later the poet, now not only
ill but ageing, walked on to the Griboyedov verandah. It was nearly empty.
Ryukhin, laden with dish-cloths, was greeted warmly by Archibald
Archibaldovich and immediately relieved of the horrible rags. If Ryukhin had
not been so exhausted by the lorry-ride and by his experiences at the
clinic, he would probably have enjoyed describing everything that had
happened in the hospital and would have embellished the story with some
invented details. But for the moment he was incapable. Although Ryukhin was
not an observant man, now, after his agony on the lorry, for the first time
be looked really hard at the pirate and realised that although the man was
asking questions about Bezdomny and even exclaiming ' Oh, poor fellow! ' he

was in reality totally indifferent to Bezdomny's fate and did not feel sorry
for him at all. ' Good for him! He's right! ' thought Ryukhin with cynical,
masochistic relish and breaking off his description of the symptoms of
schizophrenia, he asked :
'Archibald Archibaldovich, could I possibly have a glass of vodka. .
.? '
The pirate put on a sympathetic expression and whispered :
'Of course, I quite understand . . . right away . . .' and signalled
to a waiter.
A quarter of an hour later Ryukhin was sitting in absolute solitude
hunched over a dish of sardines, drinking glass after glass of vodka,
understanding more and more about himself and admitting that there was
nothing in his life that he could put right--he could only try to forget.
The poet had wasted his night while others had spent it enjoying
themselves and now he realised that it was lost forever. He only had to lift
his head up from the lamp and look at the sky to see that the night had gone
beyond return. Waiters were hurriedly jerking the cloths off the tables. The
cats pacing the verandah had a morning look about them. Day broke inexorably
over the poet.

7.The Haunted Flat

If next day someone had said to Stepa Likhodeyev 'Stepa! If vou don't
get up this minute you're going to be shot,' he would have replied in a
faint, languid voice : ' All right, shoot me. Do what you like to me, but
I'm not getting up! '
The worst of it was that he could not open his eyes, because when he
did so there would be a flash of lightning and his head would shiver to
fragments. A great bell was tolling in his head, brown spots with livid
green edges were swimming around somewhere between his eyeballs and his
closed lids. To cap it all he felt sick and the nausea was somehow connected
with the sound of a gramophone.
Stepa tried to remember what had happened, but could only recall one
thing--yesterday, somewhere. God knows where, he had been holding a table
napkin and trying to kiss a woman, promising her that he would come and
visit her tomorrow at the stroke of noon. She had refused, saying ' No, no,
I won't be at home,' but Stepa had insisted ' I don't care--I'll come
anyway!'
Stepa had now completely forgotten who that woman had been, what the
time was, what day of what month it was, and worst of all he had no idea
where he was. In an effort to find out, he unstuck his gummed-up left
eyelid. Something glimmered in the semi-darkness. At last Stepa recognised
it as a mirror. He was lying cross-wise on the bed in his own bedroom. Then
something hit him on the head and he closed his eyes and groaned.
Stepa Likhodeyev, manager of the Variety Theatre, had woken up thait
morning in the flat that he shared with Berlioz in a big six-stoirey block
of flats on Sadovaya Street. This flat--No. 50-- had a strange reputation.
Two years before, it had been owned by the widow of a jeweller called de
Fougere, Anna Frantzevna, a respectable and very business-like lady of
fifty, who let three of her five rooms to lodgers. One of them was, it
seems, called Belomut; the other's name has been lost.
Two years ago odd things began happening in that apartment-- people
started to vanish from it without trace. One Monday afternoon a policeman
called, invited the second lodger (the one whose name is no longer known)
into the hall and asked him to come along to the police station for a minute
or two to sign a document. The lodger told Anfisa, Anna Frantzevna's devoted
servant of many years, to say that if anybody rang him up he would be back

in ten minutes. He then went out accompanied by the courteous policeman in
white gloves. But he not only failed to come back in ten minutes; he never
came back at all. Odder still, the policeman appeared to have vanished with
him.
Anfisa, a devout and frankly rather a superstitious woman, informed the
distraught Anna Frantsevna that it was witchcraft, that she knew perfectly
well who had enticed away the lodger and the policeman, only she dared not
pronounce the name at night-time.
Witchcraft once started, as we all know, is virtually unstoppable. The
anonymous lodger disappeared, you will remember, on a Monday ; the following
Wednesday Belomut, too, vanished from the face of the earth, although
admittedly in different circumstances. He was fetched as usual in the
morning by the car which took him to work, but it never brought him back and
never called again.
Words cannot describe the pain and distress which this caused to madame
Belomut, but alas for her, she was not fated to endure even this unhappy
state for long. On returning from her dacha that evening, whither she had
hastily gone with Anfisa, Anna Frantzevna found no trace of madame Belomut
in the flat and what was more, the doors of both rooms occupied by the
Belomuts had been sealed. Two days of uncertainty and insomnia passed for
Anna Frantzevna ; on the third day she made another hasty visit to her dacha
from whence, it need hardly be said, she never returned. Anfisa, left alone,
cried her eye s out and finally went to bed at two-o'clock in the morning.
Nobody knows what happened to her after that, but tenants of the
neighbouring flat described having heard knocking coming from No. 50 and
having seen lights burning in the windows all night. By morning Anfisa too
was gone. Legends of all kinds about the mysterious flat and its vanishing
lodgers circulated in the building for some time. According to one of them
the devout and spinsteriy Anfisa used to carry twenty-five large diamonds,
belonging to Anna Frantzevna, in a chamois-leather bag between her withered
breasts. It was said, too, that among other things a priceless treasure
consisting of those same diamonds and a hoard of tsarist gold coins were
somehow found in the coal-she'd behind Anna Frantzevna's dacha. Lacking
proof, of course, we shall never know how true these rumours were. However,
the flat only remained empty for a week before Berlioz and his wife and
Stepa and his wife moved into it. Naturally as soon as they took possession
of the haunted flat the oddest things started happening to them too. Within
a single month both wives had disappeared, although not without trace.
Rumour had it that Berlioz's wife had been seen in Kharkov with a
ballet-master, whilst Stepa's wife had apparently found her way to an
orphanage where, the story went, the manager of the Variety had used his
connections to get her a room on condition that she never showed her face in
Sadovaya Street again. . . .
So Stepa groaned. He wanted to call his maid, Grunya, and ask her for
an aspirin but he was conscious enough to realise that it would be useless
because Grunya most probably had no aspirin. He tried to call for Berlioz's
help and twice moaned ' Misha . . . Misha . . .', but as you will have
guessed, there was no reply. There was complete silence in the flat.
Wriggling his toes, Stepa deduced that he was lying in his socks. He
ran a trembling hand down his hip to test whether he had his trousers on or
not and found that he had not. At last, realising that he was alone and
abandoned, that there was nobody to help him, he decided to get up, whatever
superhuman effort it might cost him.
Stepa prised open his eyelids and saw himself reflected in the long
mirror in the shape of a man whose hair stuck out in all directions, with a
puffy, stubble-grown face, with watery eyes and wearing a dirty shirt, a
collar, tie, underpants and socks.
As he looked at himself in the mirror, he also noticed standing beside
it a strange man dressed in a black suit and a black beret.
Stepa sat up on the bed and did his best to focus his bloodshot eyes on
the stranger. The silence was broken by the unknown visitor, who said
gravely, in a low voice with a foreign accent:
'Good morning, my dear Stepan Bogdanovich! '
There was a pause. Pulling himself together with fearful effort Stepa

said:
'What do you want?' He did not recognise his own voice. He had spoken
the word ' what' in a treble, ' do you ' in a bass and ' want' had simply
not emerged at all.
The stranger gave an amiable smile, pulled out a large gold watch with
a diamond triangle on the cover, listened to it strike eleven times and said
:
'Eleven. I have been waiting exactly an hour for you to wake up. You
gave me an appointment to see you at your flat at ten so here I am!'
Stepa fumbled for his trousers on the chair beside his bed and
whispered:
'Excuse me. . . .' He put on his trousers and asked hoarsely :
'Please tell me--who are you? '
He found talking difficult, as with every word someone stuck a needle
into his brain, causing him infernal agony.
'What! Have you forgotten my name too? ' The stranger smiled.
'Sorry . . .' said Stepa huskily. He could feel his hangover
developing a new symptom : the floor beside his bed seemed to be on the move
and any moment now he was liable to take a dive head first down into hell.
'My dear Stepan Bogdanovich,' said the visitor with a shrewd smile. '
Aspirin will do you no good. Follow a wise old rule-- the hair of the dog.
The only thing that will bring you back to life is two measures of vodka
with something sharp and peppery to eat.'
Ill though Stepa was he had enough sense to realise that since he had
been found in this state he had better tell all.
'Frankly . . .' he began, scarcely able to move his tongue, ' I did
have a bit too . . .'
'Say no more! ' interrupted the visitor and pushed the armchair to one
side.
Stepa's eyes bulged. There on a little table was a tray, laid with
slices of white bread and butter, pressed caviare in a glass bowl, pickled
mushrooms on a saucer, something in a little saucepan and finally vodka in
one of the jeweller's ornate decanters. The decanter was so chilled that it
was wet with condensation from standing in a finger-bowl full of cracked
ice.
The stranger cut Stepa's astonishment short by deftly pouring him out
half a glass of vodka.
'What about you? ' croaked Stepa.
'With pleasure! '
With a shaking hand Stepa raised the glass to his lips and the
mysterious guest swallowed his at one gulp. As he munched his caviare Stepa
was able to squeeze out the words :
'Won't you have a bite to eat too? '
'Thank you, but I never eat when I'm drinking,' replied the stranger,
pouring out a second round. He lifted the lid of the saucepan. It contained
little frankfurters in tomato sauce.
Slowly the awful green blobs in front of his eyes dissolved, words
started to form and most important of all Stepa's memory began to come back.
That was it--he had been at Khustov's dacha at Skhodna and Khustov had
driven Stepa out there by taxi. He even remembered hailing the taxi outside
the Metropole. There had been another man with them--an actor ... or was he
an actor? . . . anyhow he had a portable gramophone. Yes, yes, they had all
gone to the dacha! And the dogs, he remembered, had started howling when
they played the gramophone. Only the woman Stepa had tried to kiss remained
a complete blank . . . who the hell was she? . . . Didn't she work for the
radio? Or perhaps she didn't. . . .
Gradually the previous day came back into focus, but Stepa was much
more interested in today and in particular in this odd stranger who had
materialised in his bedroom complete with snacks and vodka. If only someone
would explain it all!
'Well, now, I hope, you've remembered my name? '
Stepa could only grin sheepishly and spread his hands.
'Well, really! I suspect you drank port on top of vodka last night.
What a way to behave!'

'Please keep this to yourself,' said Stepa imploringly.
'Oh, of course, of course! But naturally I can't vouch for Khustov.'
'Do you know Khustov? '
'I saw that individual for a moment or two in your office yesterday,
but one cursory glance at his face was enough to convince me that he was a
scheming, quarrelsome, sycophantic swine.'
'He's absolutely right! ' thought Stepa, amazed at such a truthful,
precise and succinct description of Khustov.
The ruins of yesterday were piecing themselves together now, but the
manager of the Variety still felt vaguely anxious. There was still a gaping
black void in his memory. He had absolutely no recollection of having seen
this stranger in his office the day before.
'Woland, professor of black magic,' said the visitor gravely, and
seeing Stepa was still in difficulties he described their meeting in detail.
He had arrived in Moscow from abroad yesterday, had immediately called
on Stepa and offered himself as a guest artiste at the Variety. Stepa had
telephoned the Moscow District Theatrical Commission, had agreed to the
proposal (Stepa turned pale and blinked) and had signed a contract with
Professor Woland for seven performances (Stepa's mouth dropped open),
inviting Woland to call on him at ten o'clock the next morning to conclude
the details. ... So Woland had come. When he arrived he had been met by
Grunya the maid, who explained that she herself had only just arrived
because she lived out, that Berlioz wasn't at home and that if the gentleman
wanted to see Stepan Bogdanovich he should go into the bedroom.. Stepan
Bogdanovich had been sleeping so soundly that she had been unable to wake
him. Seeing the condition that Stepa was in, the artiste had sent Grunya out
to the nearest delicatessen for some vodka and snacks, to the chemist for
some ice and . . .
'You must let me settle up with you,' moaned Stepa, thoroughly
crushed, and began hunting for his wallet.
'Oh, what nonsense! ' exclaimed the artiste and would hear no more of
it.
So that explained the vodka and the food; but Stepa was miserably
confused: he could remember absolutely nothing about a contract and he would
die before admitting to having seen Woland the previous day. Khustov had
been there all right, but not Woland.
'Would you mind showing me the contract?' asked Stepa gently.
'Oh, but of course. . . .'
Stepa looked at the sheet of paper and went numb. It was all there :
his own bold signature, the backward-sloping signature of Rimsky, the
treasurer, sanctioning the payment to Woland of a cash advance of ten
thousand roubles against his total fee of thirty-five thousand roubles for
seven performances. And what was more--Woland's receipt for ten thousand
roubles!
'What the hell? ' thought the miserable Stepa. His head began to spin.
Was this one of his lapses of memory? Well, of course, now that the actual
contract had been produced any further signs of disbelief would merely be
rude. Stepa excused himself for a moment and ran to the telephone in the
hall,. On the way he shouted towards the kitchen :
'Grunya! '
There was no reply. He glanced at the door of Berlioz's study, which
opened off the hall, and stopped, as they say, dumbfounded. There, tied to
the door-handle, hung an enormous wax seal.
'My God! ' said a voice in Stepa's head. ' If that isn't the last
straw! ' It would be difficult to describe Stepa's mental confusion. First
this diabolical character with his black beret, the iced vodka and that
incredible contract. . . . And then, if you please, a seal on the door! Who
could ever imagine Berlioz getting into any sort of trouble? No one. Yet
there it was--a seal. H'm.
Stepa was at once assailed by a number of uncomfortable little thoughts
about an article which he had recently talked Mikhail Alexandrovich into
printing in his magazine. Frankly the article had been awful--stupid,
politically dubious and badly paid. Hard on the heels of his recollection of
the article came a memory of a slightly equivocal conversation which had

taken place, as far as he could remember, on 24th April here in the
dining-room when Stepa and Berlioz had been having supper together. Of
course their talk had not really been dubious (Stepa would not have joined
in any such conversation) but it had been on a rather unnecessary subject.
They could easily have avoided having it altogether. Before the appearance
of this seal the conversation would undoubtedly have been dismissed as
utterly trivial, but since the seal . . .
'Oh, Berlioz, Berlioz,' buzzed the voice in Stepa's head. ' Surely
he'll never mention it!'
But there was no time for regrets. Stepa dialled the office of Rimsky,
the Variety Theatre's treasurer. Stepa was in a delicate position: for one
thing, the foreigner might be offended at Stepa ringing up to check on him
after he had been shown the contract and for another, the treasurer was an
extremely difficult man to deal with. After all he couldn't just say to him
: ' Look here, did J sign a contract yesterday for thirty-five thousand
roubles with a professor of black magic? ' It simply wouldn't do!
'Yes? ' came Rimsky's harsh, unpleasant voice in the earphone.
'Hello, Grigory Danilovich,' said Stepa gently. ' Likhodeyev speaking.
It's about this ... er ... this fellow . . . this artiste, in my flat,
called, er, Woland . . . I just wanted to ask you about this evening--is
everything O.K.? '
'Oh, the black magician? ' replied Rimsky. ' The posters will be here
any minute now.'
'Uhuh . . .' said Stepa weakly. ' O.K., so long . . .'
'Will you be coming over soon? ' asked Rimsky.
'In half an hour,' answered Stepa and replacing the receiver he
clasped his feverish head. God, how embarrassing! What an appalling thing to
forget!
As it would be rude to stay in the hall for much longer, Stepa
concocted a plan. He had to use every possible means of concealing his
incredible forgetfulness and begin by cunningly persuading the foreigner to
tell him exactly what he proposed to do in his act at the Variety.
With this Stepan turned away from the telephone and in the hall mirror,
which the lazy Grunya had not dusted for years, he clearly saw a
weird-looking man, as thin as a bean-pole and wearing a pince-nez. Then the
apparition vanished. Stepa peered anxiously down the hallway and immediately
had another shock as a huge black cat appeared in the mirror and also
vanished.
Stepa's heart gave a jump and he staggered back.
'What in God's name . . .? ' he thought. ' Am I going out of my mind?
Where are these reflections coming from? ' He gave another look round the
hall and shouted in alarm :
'Grunya! What's this cat doing, sneaking in here? Where does it come
from? And who's this other character? '
'Don't worry, Stepan Bogdanovich,' came a voice, though not
Grunya's--it was the visitor speaking from the bedroom. ' The cat is mine.
Don't be nervous. And Grunya's not here--I sent her away to her family in
Voronezh. She complained that you had cheated her out of her leave.'
These words were so unexpected and so absurd that Stepa decided he had
not heard them. In utter bewilderment he bounded back into the bedroom and
froze on the threshold. His hair rose and a mild sweat broke out on his
forehead.
The visitor was no longer alone in the bedroom. The second armchair was
now occupied by the creature who had materialised in the hall. He was now to
be seen quite plainly--feathery moustache, one lens of his pince-nez
glittering, the other missing. But worst of all wa:s the third invader : a
black cat of revolting proportions sprawled in a nonchalant attitude on the
pouffe, a glass of vodka in one paw and a fork, on which he had just speared
a pickled mushroom, in the other.
Stepa felt the light in the bedroom, already weak enough, begin to
fade. ' This must be what it's like to go mad . . .' he thought, clutching
the doorpost.
'You seem slightly astonished, my dear Stepan Bogdanovich,' said
Woland. Stepai's teeth were chattering. ' But I assure you there is nothing

to be surprised at. These are my assistants.'
Here the cat drank its vodka and Stepa's hand dropped from the
doorpost.
'And my assistants need a place to stay,' went on Woland, ' so it
seems that there is one too many of us in this flat. That one, I rather
think, is you.'
'Yes, that's them! ' said the tall man in a goatish voice, speaking of
Stepa in the plural. ' They've been behaving disgustingly lately. Getting
drunk, carrying on with women, trading on their position and not doing a
stroke of work--not that they could do anything even if they tried because
they're completely incompetent. Pulling the wool over the boss's eyes,
that's what they've been doing! '
'Drives around in a free car! ' said the cat slanderously, chewing a
mushroom.
Then occurred the fourth and last phenomenon at which Stepa collapsed
entirely, his weakened hand scraping down the doorpost as he slid to the
floor.
Straight from the full-length mirror stepped a short but unusually
broad-she uldered man with a bowler hat on his head. A fang protruding from
his mouth disfigured an already hideous physiognomy that was topped with
fiery red hair.
'I cannot,' put in the new arrival, ' understand how he ever came to
be manager'--his voice grew more and more nasal-- ' he's as much a manager
as I am a bishop.'
'You don't look much like a bishop, Azazello,' remarked the cat,
piling sausages on his plate.
'That's what I mean,' snarled the man with red hair and turning to
Woland he added in a voice of respect: ' Will you permit us, messire, to
kick him out of Moscow? '
'Shoo!! ' suddenly hissed the cat, its hair standing on end.
The bedroom began to spin round Stepa, he hit his head on the doorpost
and as he lost consciousness he thought, ' I'm dying . . .'
But he did not die. Opening his eyes slightly he found himself sitting
on something made of stone. There was a roaring sound nearby. When he opened
his eyes fully he realised that the roaring was the sea; that the waves were
breaking at his feet, that he was in fact sitting on the very end of a stone
pier, a shining blue sky above him and behind him a white town climbing up
the mountainside.
Not knowing quite what to do in a case like this, Stepa raised himself
on to his shaking legs and walked down the pier to the shore.
On the pier stood a man, smoking and spitting into the sea. He glared
at Stepa and stopped spitting.
Stepa then did an odd thing--he kneeled down in front of the unknown
smoker and said :
'Tell me, please, where am I? '
'Well, I'm damned! ' said the unsympathetic smoker.
'I'm not drunk,' said Stepa hoarsely. ' Something's happened to me,
I'm ill. . . . Where am I? What town is this? '
'Yalta, of course. . . .'
Stepa gave a gentle sigh, collapsed and fainted as he struck his head
on the warm stonework of the pier.

8. A. Duel between Professor and Poet

At about half past eleven that morning, just as Stepa lost
consciousness in Yalta, Ivan Nikolayich Bezdomny regained it, waking from a
deep and prolonged sleep. For a while he tried to think why he was in this
strange room with its white walls, its odd little bedside table made of

shiny metal and its white shutters, through which the sun appeared to be
shining.
Ivan shook his head to convince himself that it was not aching and
remembered that he was in a hospital. This in turn reminded him of Berlioz's
death, but today Ivan no longer found this very disturbing. After his long
sleep Ivan Nikolayich felt calmer and able to think more clearly. After
lying for a while motionless in his spotlessly clean and comfortably sprung
bed, Ivan noticed a bell-push beside him. Out of a habit of fingering
anything in sight, Ivan pressed it. He expected a bell to ring or a person
to appear, but something quite different happened.
At the foot of Ivan's bed a frosted-glass cylinder lit up with the word
'DRINK'. After a short spell in that position, the cylinder began turning
until it stopped at another word:
'NANNY '. Ivan found this clever machine slightly confusing. ' NANNY '
was replaced by ' CALL THE DOCTOR '.
'H'm . . .' said Ivan, at a loss to know what the machine expected him
to do. Luck came to his rescue. Ivan pressed the button at the word ' NURSE
'. In reply the machine gave a faint tinkle, stopped and went out. Into the
room came a kind-looking woman in a clean white overall and said to Ivan :
'Good morning!'
Ivan did not reply, as he felt the greeting out of place in the
circumstances. They had, after all, dumped a perfectly healthy man in
hospital and were making it worse by pretending it was necessary! With the
same kind look the woman pressed a button and raised the blind. Sunlight
poured into the room through a light, wide-mesh grille that extended to the
floor. Beyond the grille was a balcony, beyond that the bank of a meandering
river and on the far side a cheerful pine forest.
'Bath time! ' said the woman invitingly and pushed aside a folding
partition to reveal a magnificently equipped bathroom.
Although Ivan had made up his mind not to talk to the woman, when he
saw a broad stream of water thundering into the bath from a glittering tap
he could not help saying sarcastically :
'Look at that! Just like in the Metropole! '
'Oh, no,' replied the woman proudly. ' Much better. There's no
equipment like this anywhere, even abroad. Professors and doctors come here
specially to inspect our clinic. We have foreign tourists here every day.'
At the words ' foreign tourist' Ivan at once remembered the mysterious
professor of the day before. He scowled and said :
'Foreign tourists . . . why do you all think they're so wonderful?
There are some pretty odd specimens among them, I can tell you. I met one
yesterday--he was a charmer! '
He was just going to start telling her about Pontius Pilate, but
changed his mind. The woman would never understand and it was useless to
expect any help from her.
Washed and clean, Ivan Nikolayich was immediately provided with
everything a man needs after a bath--a freshly ironed shirt, underpants and
socks. That was only a beginning : opening the door of a wardrobe, the woman
pointed inside and asked him:
'What would you like to wear--a dressing gown or pyjamas? '
Although he was a prisoner in his new home, Ivan found it hard to
resist the woman's easy, friendly manner and he pointed to a pair of crimson
flannelette pyjamas.
After that Ivan Nikolayich was led along an empty, soundless corridor
into a room of vast dimensions. He had decided to treat everything in this
wonderfully equipped building with
sarcasm and he at once mentally christened this room ' the factory
kitchen'.
And with good reason. There were cupboards and glass-fronted cabinets
full of gleaming nickel-plated instruments. There were armchairs of
strangely complex design, lamps with shiny, bulbous shades, a mass of
phials, bunsen burners, electric cables and various totally mysterious
pieces of apparatus.
Three people came into the room to see Ivan, two women and one man, all
in white. They began by taking Ivan to a desk in the corner to interrogate

him.
Ivan considered the situation. He had a choice of three courses. The
first was extremely tempting--to hurl himself at these lamps and other
ingenious gadgets and smash them all to pieces as a way of expressing his
protest at being locked up for nothing. But today's Ivan was significantly
different from the Ivan of yesterday and he found the first course dubious ;
it would only make them more convinced that he was a dangerous lunatic, so
he abandoned it. There was a second--to begin at once telling them the story
about the professor and Pontius Pilate. However yesterday's experience had
shown him that people either refused to believe the story or completely
misunderstood it, so Ivan rejected that course too, deciding to adopt the
third: he would wrap himself in proud silence.
It proved impossible to keep it up, and willy-nilly he found himself
answering, albeit curtly and sulkily, a whole series of questions. They
carefully extracted from Ivan everything about his past life, down to an
attack of scarlet fever fifteen years before. Having filled a whole page on
Ivan they turned it over and one of the women in white started questioning
him about his relatives. It was a lengthy performance--who had died, when
and why, did they drink, had they suffered from venereal disease and so
forth. Finally they asked him to describe what had happened on the previous
day at Patriarch's Ponds, but they did not pay much attention to it and the
story about Pontius Pilate left them cold.
The woman then handed Ivan over to the man, who took a different line
with him, this time in silence. He took Ivan's temperature, felt his pulse
and looked into his eyes while he shone a lamp into them. The other woman
came to the man's assistance and they hit Ivan on the back with some
instrument, though not painfully, traced some signs on the skin of his chest
with the handle of a little hammer, hit him on the knees with more little
hammers, making Ivan's legs jerk, pricked his finger and drew blood from it,
pricked his elbow joint, wrapped rubber bracelets round his arm . . .
Ivan could only smile bitterly to himself and ponder on the absurdity
of it all. He had wanted to warn them all of the danger threatening them
from the mysterious professor, and had tried to catch him, yet all he had
achieved was to land up in this weird laboratory just to talk a lot of
rubbish about his uncle Fyodor who had died of drink in Vologda.
At last they let Ivan go. He was led back to his room where he was
given a cup of coffee, two soft-boiled eggs and a slice of white bread and
butter. When he had eaten his breakfast, Ivan made up his mind to wait for
someone in charge of the clinic to arrive, to make him listen and to plead
for justice.
The man came soon after Ivan's breakfast. The door into Ivan's room
suddenly opened and in swept a crowd of people in white overalls. In front
strode a man of about forty-five, with a clean-shaven, actorish face, kind
but extremely piercing eyes and a courteous manner. The whole retinue showed
him signs of attention and respect, which gave his entrance a certain
solemnity. ' Like Pontius Pilate! ' thought Ivan.
Yes, he was undoubtedly the man in charge. He sat down on a stool.
Everybody else remained standing.
'How do you do. My name is doctor Stravinsky,' he said as he sat down,
looking amiably at Ivan.
'Here you are, Alexander Nikolayich,' said a neatly bearded man and
handed the chief Ivan's filled-in questionnaire.
'They've got it all sewn up,' thought Ivan. The man in charge ran a
practised eye over the sheet of paper, muttered' Mm'hh' and exchanged a few
words with his colleagues in a strange language. ' And he speaks Latin
too--like Pilate ', mused Ivan sadly. Suddenly a word made him shudder. It
was the word ' schizophrenia ', which the sinister stranger had spoken at
Patriarch's Ponds. Now professor Stravinsky was saying it. ' So he knew
about this, too! ' thought Ivan uneasily.
The chief had adopted the rule of agreeing with everybody and being
pleased with whatever other people might say, expressing it by the word '
Splendid . . .'
'Splendid! ' said Stravinsky, handing back the sheet of paper. He
turned to Ivan.

'Are you a poet? '
'Yes, I am,' replied Ivan glumly and for the first time he suddenly
felt an inexplicable revulsion to poetry. Remembering some of his own poems,
they struck him as vaguely unpleasant.
Frowning, he returned Stravinsky's question by asking:
'Are you a professor? '
To this Stravinsky, with engaging courtesy, inclined his head.
'Are you in charge here? ' Ivan went on.
To this, too, Stravinsky nodded.
'I must talk to you,' said Ivan Nikolayich in a significant tone.
'That's why I'm here,' answered Stravinsky.
'Well this is the situation,' Ivan began, sensing that his hour had
come. ' They say I'm mad and nobody wants to listen to me!'
'Oh no, we will listen very carefully to everything you have to say,'
said Stravinsky seriously and reassuringly, ' and on no account shall we
allow anyone to say you're mad.'
'All right, then, listen: yesterday evening at Patriarch's Ponds I met
a mysterious person, who may or may not have been a foreigner, who knew
about Berlioz's death before it happened, and had met Pontius Pilate.'
The retinue listened to Ivan, silent and unmoving.
'Pilate? Is that the Pilate who lived at the time of Jesus Christ?'
enquired Stravinsky, peering at Ivan. ' Yes.'
'Aha,' said Stravinsky. ' And this Berlioz is the one who died falling
under a tram? '
'Yes. I was there yesterday evening when the tram killed him, and this
mysterious character was there too .'
'Pontius Pilate's friend? ' asked Stravinsky, obviously a man of
exceptional intelligence.
'Exactly,' said Ivan, studying Stravinsky. ' He told us, before it
happened, that Anna had spilt the sunflower-seed oil ... and that was the
very spot where Berlioz slipped! How d'you like that?!' Ivan concluded,
expecting his story to produce a big effect.
But it produced none. Stravinsky simply asked :
'And who is this Anna? '
Slightly disconcerted by the question, Ivan frowned.
'Anna doesn't matter,' he said irritably. ' God knows who she is.
Simply some stupid girl from Sadovaya Street. What's important, don't you
see, is that he knew about the sunflower-seed oil beforehand. Do you follow
me? '
'Perfectly,' replied Stravinsky seriously. Patting the poet's knee he
added : ' Relax and go on.'
'All right,' said Ivan, trying to fall into Stravinsky's tone and
knowing from bitter experience that only calm would help him. ' So obviously
this terrible man (he's lying, by the way--he's no professor) has some
unusual power . . . For instance, if you chase him you can't catch up with
him . . . and there's a couple of others with him, just as peculiar in their
way: a tall fellow with broken spectacles and an enormous cat who rides on
the tram by himself. What's more,' went on Ivan with great heat and
conviction, ' he was on the balcony with Pontius Pilate, there's no doubt of
it. What about that, eh? He must be arrested immediately or he'll do untold
harm.'
'So you think he should be arrested? Have I understood you correctly?
' asked Stravinsky.
‘ He's clever,' thought Ivan, ' I must admit there are a few bright
ones among the intellectuals,' and he replied :
'Quite correct. It's obvious--he must be arrested! And meanwhile I'm
being kept here by force while they flash lamps at me, bath me and ask me
idiotic questions about uncle Fyodor! He's been dead for years! I demand to
be let out at once! '
'Splendid, splendid! ' cried Stravinsky. ' I see it all now. You're
right--what is the use of keeping a healthy man in hospital? Very well, I'll
discharge you at once if you tell me you're normal. You don't have to prove
it--just say it. Well, are you normal? '
There was complete silence. The fat woman who had examined Ivan that

morning glanced reverently at the professor and once again Ivan thought:
'Extremely clever! '
The professor's offer pleased him a great deal, but before replying he
thought hard, frowning, until at last he announced firmly:
'I am normal.'
'Splendid,' exclaimed Stravinsky with relief. ' In that case let us
reason logically. We'll begin by considering what happened to you
yesterday.' Here he turned and was immediately handed Ivan's questionnaire.
' Yesterday, while in search of an unknown man, who had introduced himself
as a friend of Pontius Pilate, you did the following: ' Here Stravinsky
began ticking off the points on his long fingers, glancing back and forth
from the paper to Ivan. ' You pinned an ikon to your chest. Right? '
'Right,' Ivan agreed sulkily.
'You fell off a fence and scratched your face. Right? You appeared in
a restaurant carrying a lighted candle, wearing only underpants, and you hit
somebody in the restaurant. You were tied up and brought here, where you
rang the police and asked them to send some machine-guns. You then attempted
to throw yourself out of the window. Right? The question--is that the way to
set about catching or arresting somebody? If you're normal you're bound to
reply--no, it isn't. You want to leave here? Very well. But where, if you
don't mind my asking, do you propose to go? ' ' To the police, of course,'
replied Ivan, although rather less firmly and slightly disconcerted by the
professor's stare.
'Straight from here? '
'Mm'hh.'
'Won't you go home first? ' Stravinsky asked quickly.
'Why should I go there? While I'm going home he might get away!'
'I see. And what will you tell the police? '
'I'll tell them about Pontius Pilate,' replied Ivan Nikolayich, his
eyes clouding.
'Splendid! ' exclaimed Stravinsky, defeated, and turning to the man
with the beard he said: ' Fyodor Vasilievich, please arrange for citizen
Bezdomny to be discharged. But don't put anybody else in this room and don't
change the bedclothes. Citizen Bezdomny will be back here again in two
hours. Well,' he said to the poet, ‘I won't wish you success because I see
no chance whatever of your succeeding. See you soon!' He got up and his
retinue started to go.
'Why will I come back here? ' asked Ivan anxiously.
'Because as soon as you appear at a police station dressed in your
underpants and say yom've met a man who knew Pontius Pilate, you'll
immediately be brought back here and put in this room again.'
'Because of my underpants? ' asked Ivan, staring distractedly about
him.
'Chiefly because of Pontims Pilate. But the underpants will help. We
shall have to take a.way your hospital clothes and give you back your own.
And you came here wearing underpants. Incidentally you said nothing about
going home first, despite my hint. After that you only have to start talking
about Pontius Pilate . . . and you're done for.'
At this point something odd happened to Ivan Nikolayich. His will-power
seemed to crumple. He felt himself weak and in need of advice.
'What should I do, then? ' he asked, timidly this time.
'Splendid! ' said Stravinsky. ' A most reasonable question.
Now I'll tell you what has really happened to you. Yesterday someone
gave you a bad fright and upset you with this story about Pontius Pilate and
other things. So you, worn out and nerve-racked, wandered round the town
talking about Pontius Pilate. Quite naturally people took you for a lunatic.
Your only salvation now is complete rest. And you must stay here.'
'But somebody must arrest him! ' cried Ivan, imploringly.
'Certainly, but why should you have to do it? Put down all your
suspicions and accusations against this man on a piece of paper. Nothing
could be simpler than to send your statement to the proper authorities and
if, as you suspect, the man is a criminal, it will come to light soon
enough. But on one condition--don't over-exert your mind and try to think a
bit less about Pontius Pilate. If you harp on that story I don't think many

people are going to believe you.'
'Right you are! ' announced Ivan firmly. ' Please give me pen and
paper.'
'Give him some paper and a short pencil,' said Stravinsky to the fat
woman, then turning to Ivan : ' But I don't advise you to start writing
today.'
'No, no, today! I must do it today! ' cried Ivan excitedly.
'All right. Only don't overtax your brain. If you don't get it quite
right today, tomorrow will do.'
'But he'll get away! '
'Oh no,' countered Stravinsky. ' I assure you he's not going to get
away. And remember--we are here to help you in every way we can and unless
we do, nothing will come of your plan. D'you hear? ' Stravinsky suddenly
asked, seizing Ivan Nikolay-ich by both hands. As he held them in his own he
stared intently into Ivan's eyes, repeating : ' We shall help you ... do you
hear? . . . We shall help you . . . you will be able to relax . . . it's
quiet here, everything's going to be all right ... all right . . . we shall
help you . . .'
Ivan Nikolayich suddenly yawned and his expression softened.
'Yes, I see,' he said quietly.
'Splendid! ' said Stravinsky, closing the conversation in his no
habitual way and getting up. ' Goodbye!' He shook Ivan by the hand and as he
went out he turned to the man with the beard and said : ' Yes, and try
oxygen . . . and baths.'
A few moments later Stravinsky and his retinue were gone. Through the
window and the grille the gay, springtime wood gleamed brightly on the far
bank and the river sparkled in the noon sunshine.

9. Koroviev's Tricks

Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi, chairman of the tenants' association of No.
302A, Sadovaya Street, Moscow, where the late Berlioz had lived, was in
trouble. It had all begun on the previous Wednesday night.
At midnight, as we already know, the police had arrived with Zheldybin,
had hauled Nikanor Ivanovich out of bed, told him of Berlioz's death and
followed him to flat No. 50. There they had sealed the deceased's papers and
personal effects. Neither Grunya the maid, who lived out, nor the imprudent
Stepan Bogdanovich were in the flat at the time. The police informed Nikanor
Ivanovich that they would call later to collect Berlioz's manuscripts for
sorting and examination and that his accommodation, consisting of three
rooms (the jeweller's study, drawing-room and dining-room) would revert to
the tenants' association for disposal. His effects were to be kept under
seal until the legatees' claims were proved by the court.
The news of Berlioz's death spread through the building with
supernatural speed and from seven o'clock on Thursday morning Bosoi started
to get telephone calls. After that people began calling in person with
written pleas of their urgent need of vacant housing space. Within the space
of two hours Nikanor Ivanovich had collected thirty-two such statements.
They contained entreaties, threats, intrigue, denunciations, promises
to redecorate the flat, remarks about overcrowding and the impossibility of
sharing a flat with bandits. Among them was a description, shattering in its
literary power, of the theft of some meat-balls from someone's jacket pocket
in flat No. 31, two threats of suicide and one confession of secret
pregnancy.
Nikanor Ivanovich was again and again taken aside with a wink and
assured in whispers that he would do well on the deal....
This torture lasted until one o'clock, when Nikanor Ivanovich simply
ran out of his flat by the main entrance, only to run away again when he
found them lying in wait for him outside. Somehow contriving to throw off

the people who chased him across the asphalt courtyard, Nikanor Ivanovich
took refuge in staircase 6 and climbed to the fatal apartment.
Panting with exertion, the stout Nikanor Ivanovich rang the bell on the
fifth-floor landing. No one opened. He rang again and again and began to
swear quietly. Still no answer. Nikanor Ivanovich's patience gave way and
pulling a bunch of duplicate keys from his pocket he opened the door with a
masterful flourish and walked in.
'Hello, there! ' shouted Nikanor Ivanovich in the dim hallway. ' Are
you there, Grunya? '
No reply.
Nikanor Ivanovich then took a folding ruler out of his pocket, used it
to prise the seal from the study door and strode in. At least he began by
striding in, but stopped in the doorway with a start of amazement.
Behind Berlioz's desk sat a tall, thin stranger in a check jacket,
jockey cap and pince-nez. . . .
'And who might you be, citizen? ' asked Nikanor Ivanovich.
'Nikanor Ivanovich! ' cried the mysterious stranger in a quavering
tenor. He leaped up and greeted the chairman with an unexpectedly powerful
handshake which Nikanor Ivanovich found extremely painful.
'Pardon me,' he said suspiciously, ' but who are you? Are you somebody
official? '
'Ah, Nikanor Ivanovich! ' said the stranger in a man-to-man voice. '
Who is official and who is unofficial these days? It all depends on your
point of view. It's all so vague and changeable, Nikanor Ivanovich. Today
I'm unofficial, tomorrow, hey presto! I'm official! Or maybe vice-versa--who
knows? '
None of this satisfied the chairman. By nature a suspicious man, he
decided that this voluble individual was not only unofficial but had no
business to be there.
'Who are you? What's your name? ' said the chairman firmly, advancing
on the stranger.
'My name,' replied the man, quite unmoved by this hostile reception, '
is . . . er . . . let's say . . . Koroviev. Wouldn't you like a bite to eat,
Nikanor Ivanovich? As we're friends? '
'Look here,' said Nikanor Ivanovich disagreeably, ' what the hell do
you mean--eat? ' (Sad though it is to admit, Nikanor Ivanovich had no
manners.) ' You're not allowed to come into a dead man's flat! What are you
doing here? '
'Now just sit down, Nikanor Ivanovich,' said the imperturbable
stranger in a wheedling voice, offering Nikanor Ivanovich a chair.
Infuriated, Nikanor Ivanovich kicked the chair away and yelled:
'Who are you? '
'I am employed as interpreter to a foreign gentleman residing in this
flat,' said the self-styled Koroviev by way of introduction as he clicked
the heels of his dirty brown boots.
Nikanor Ivanovich's mouth fell open. A foreigner in this flat, complete
with interpreter, was a total surprise to him and he demanded an
explanation.
This the interpreter willingly supplied. Monsieur Woland, an artiste
from abroad, had been kindly invited by the manager of the Variety Theatre,
Stepan Bogdanovich Likhodeyev, to spend his stay as a guest artiste, about a
week, in his flat. Likhodeyev had written to Nikanor Ivanovich about it
yesterday, requesting him to register the gentlemen from abroad as a
temporary resident while Likhodeyev himself was away in Yalta.
'But he hasn't written to me,' said the bewildered chairman.
'Take a look in your briefcase, Nikanor Ivanovich,' suggested Koroviev
amiably.
Shrugging his shoulders Nikanor Ivanovich opened his briefcase and
found a letter from Likhodeyev. ' Now how could I have forgotten that? '
mumbled Nikanor Ivanovich, gazing stupidly at the opened envelope.
'It happens to the best of us, Nikanor Ivanovich! ' cackled Koroviev.
' Absent-mindedness, overstrain and high blood-pressure, my dear friend!
Why, I'm horribly absent-minded. Some time over a glass or two I'll tell you
a few things that have happened to me--you'll die with laughter! '

'When is Likhodeyev going to Yalta? '
'He's already gone,' cried the interpreter. ' He's on his way there.
God knows where he is by now.' And the interpreter waved his arms like
windmill sails.
Nikanor Ivanovich announced that he had to see the foreign gentleman in
person, but this was refused. It was quite out of the question. Monsieur
Woland was busy. Training his cat.
'You can see the cat if you like,' suggested Koroviev.
This Nikanor Ivanovich declined and the interpreter then made him an
unexpected but most interesting proposal: since Monsieur Woland could not
bear staying in hotels and was used to spacious quarters, couldn't the
tenants' association lease him the whole flat for his week's stay, including
the dead man's rooms?
'After all, what does he care? He's dead,' hissed Koroviev in a
whisper. ' You must admit the flat's no use to him now, is it?'
In some perplexity Nikanor Ivanovich objected that foreigners were
normally supposed to stay at the Metropole and not in private accommodation
...
'I tell you he's so fussy, you'd never believe it,' whispered
Koroviev. ' He simply refuses! He hates hotels! I can tell you I'm fed up
with these foreign tourists,' complained Koroviev confidentially. ' They
wear me out. They come here and either they go spying and snooping or they
send me mad with their whims and fancies--this isn't right, that isn't just
so! And there'd be plenty in it for your association, Nikanor Ivanovich.
He's not short of money.' Koroviev glanced round and then whispered in the
chairman's ear : ' He's a millionaire!'
The suggestion was obviously a sensible one, but there was something
ridiculous about his manner, his clothes and that absurd, useless pince-nez
that all combined to make Nikanor Ivanovich vaguely uneasy. However he
agreed to the suggestion. The tenants' association, alas, was showing an
enormous deficit. In the autumn they would have to buy oil for the steam
heating plant and there was not a kopeck in the till, but with this
foreigner's money they might just manage it. Nikanor Ivanovich, however,
practical and cautious as ever, insisted on clearing the matter with the
tourist bureau.
'Of course! ' cried Koroviev. ' It must be done properly. There's the
telephone, Nikanor Ivanovich, ring them up right away! And don't worry about
money,' he added in a whisper as he led the chairman to the telephone in the
hall, ' if anyone can pay handsomely, he can. If you could see his villa in
Nice! When you go abroad next summer you must go there specially and have a
look at it--you'll be amazed! '
The matter was fixed with the tourist bureau with astonishing ease and
speed. The bureau appeared to know all about Monsieur Woland's intention to
stay in Likodeyev's flat and raised no objections.
'Excellent! ' cried Koroviev.
Slightly stupefied by this man's incessant cackling, the chairman
announced that the tenants' association was prepared to lease flat No. 50 to
Monsieur Woland the artiste at a rent of ... Nikanor Ivanovich stammered a
little and said :
'Five hundred roubles a day.'
At this Koroviev surpassed himself. Winking conspiratorially towards
the bedroom door, through which they could hear a series of soft thumps as
the cat practised its leaps, he said :
'So for a week that would amount to three and a half thousand,
wouldn't it? '
Nikanor Ivanovich quite expected the man to add ' Greedy, aren't you,
Nikanor Ivanovich? ' but instead he said:
'That's not much. Ask him for five thousand, he'll pay.'
Grinning with embarrassment, Nikanor Ivanovich did not even notice how
he suddenly came to be standing beside Berlioz's desk and how Koroviev had
managed with such incredible speed and dexterity to draft a contract in
duplicate. This done, he flew into the bedroom and returned with the two
copies signed in the stranger's florid hand. The chairman signed in turn and
Koroviev asked him to make out a receipt for five . . .

'Write it out in words, Nikanor Ivanovich. " Five thousand roubles ".'
Then with a flourish which seemed vaguely out of place in such a serious
matter--' Eins! 'yvei! drei! '--he laid five bundles of brand-new banknotes
on the table.
Nikanor Ivanovich checked them, to an accompaniment of witticisms from
Koroviev of the ' better safe than sorry ' variety. Having counted the money
the chairman took the stranger's passport to be stamped with his temporary
residence permit, put contract, passport and money into his briefcase and
asked shyly for a free ticket to the show . . .
'But of course! ' exclaimed Koroviev. ' How many do you want, Nikanor
Ivanovich--twelve, fifteen? '
Overwhelmed, the chairman explained that he only wanted two, one for
his wife Pelagea Antonovna and one for himself.
Koroviev seized a note-pad and dashed off an order to the box office
for two complimentary tickets in the front row. As the interpreter handed it
to Nikanor Ivanovich with his left hand, with his right he gave him a thick,
crackling package. Glancing at it Nikanor Ivanovich blushed hard and started
to push it away.
'It's not proper . . .'
'I won't hear any objection,' Koroviev whispered right in his ear. '
We don't do this sort of thing but foreigners do. You'll offend him, Nikanor
Ivanovich, and that might be awkward. You've earned it . . .'
'It's strictly forbidden . . .' whispered the chairman in a tiny
voice, with a furtive glance around.
'Where are the witnesses? ' hissed Koroviev into his other ear. ' I
ask you--where are they? Come, now . . .'
There then happened what the chairman later described as a miracle--the
package jumped into his briefcase of its own accord, after which he found
himself, feeling weak and battered, on the staircase. A storm of thoughts
was whirling round inside his head. Among them were the villa in Nice, the
trained cat, relief that there had been no witnesses and his wife's pleasure
at the complimentary tickets. Yet despite these mostly comforting thoughts,
in the depths of his soul the chairman still felt the pricking of a little
needle. It was the needle of unease. Suddenly, halfway down the staircase,
something else occurred to him-- how had that interpreter found his way into
the study past a sealed door? And why on earth had he, Nikanor Ivanovich,
forgotten to ask him about it? For a while the chairman stared at the steps
like a sheep, then decided to forget it and not to bother himself with
imaginary problems . . .
As soon as the chairman had left the flat a low voice came from the
bedroom:
'I don't care for that Nikanor Ivanovich. He's a sly rogue. Why not
fix it so that he doesn't come here again? '
'Messire, you only have to give the order . . .' answered Koroviev in
a firm, clear voice that no longer quavered.
At once the diabolical interpreter was in the hall, had dialled a
number and started to speak in a whining voice :
'Hullo! I consider it my duty to report that the chairman of our
tenants' association at No. 302А Sadovaya Street, Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi,
is dealing in black-market foreign currency. He has just stuffed four
hundred dollars wrapped in newspaper into the ventilation shaft of the
lavatory in his flat. No. 3 5. My name is Timothy Kvastsov and I live in the
same block, flat No. 11. But please keep my name a secret. I'm afraid of
what that man may do if he finds out . . .'
And with that the scoundrel hung up.
What happened after that in No. 50 is a mystery, although what happened
to Nikanor Ivanovich is common knowledge. Locking himself in the lavatory,
he pulled the package out of his briefcase and found that it contained four
hundred roubles. He wrapped it up in a sheet of old newspaper and pushed it
into the ventilation shaft. Five minutes later he was sitting down at table
in his little dining-room. From the kitchen his wife brought in a pickled
herring, sliced and thickly sprinkled with raw onion. Nikanor Ivanovich
poured himself a wineglassful of vodka, drank it, poured out another, drank
that, speared three slices of herring on his fork . . . and then the

doorbell rang. Pelagea Antonovna was just bringing in a steaming casserole,
one glance at which was enough to tell you that in the midst of all that
hot, thick borsch was one of the most delicious things in the world --a
marrow bone.
Gulping down his running saliva, Nikanor Ivanovich snarled :
'Who the hell is that--at this hour! They won't even allow a man to
eat his supper. . . . Don't let anybody in--I'm not at home.... If it's
about the flat tell them to stop worrying. There'll be a committee meeting
about it in a week's time.'
His wife ran into the hall and Nikanor Ivanovich ladled the quivering
marrow bone out of its steaming lake. At that moment three men came into the
dining-room, followed by a very pale Pelagea Antonovna. At the sight of them
Nikanor Ivanovich turned white and got up.
'Where's the W.C.? ' enquired the first man urgently. There was a
crash as Nikanor Ivanovich dropped the ladle on to the oilcloth table-top.
'Here, in here,' babbled Pelagea Antonovna. The visitors turned and
rushed back into the passage.
'What's going on? ' asked Nikanor Ivanovich as he followed them. ' You
can't just burst into our flat like that . . . Where's your identity card if
you don't mind? '
The first man showed Nikanor Ivanovich his identity card while the
second clambered up on to a stool in the lavatory and thrust his arm into
the ventilation shaft. Nikanor Ivanovich began to feel faint. They unwrapped
the sheet of newspaper to find that the banknotes in the package were not
roubles but some unknown foreign money--bluish-green in colour with a
picture of an old man. Nikanor Ivanovich, however, saw none of it very
clearly because spots were swimming in front of his eyes.
'Dollars in the ventilation shaft. . . .' said the first man
thoughtfully and asked Nikanor Ivanovich politely : * Is this your little
parcel? '
'No! ' replied Nikanor Ivanovich in a terrified voice. ' It's been
planted on me!'
'Could be,' agreed the first man, adding as quietly as before :
'Still, you'd better give up the rest.'
'There isn't any more! I swear to God I've never even seen any! '
screamed the chairman in desperation. He rushed to a chest, pulled out a
drawer and out of that his briefcase, shouting distractedly as he did so :
'It's all in here . . . the contract . . . that interpreter must have
planted them on me . . . Koroviev, the man in the pince-nez!'
He opened the briefcase, looked inside, thrust his hand in, turned blue
in the face and dropped his briefcase into the borsch. There was nothing in
it--no letter from Stepan, no contract, no passport, no money and no
complimentary tickets. Nothing, in short, except a folding ruler.
* Comrades!' screamed the chairman frantically. ' Arrest them! The
forces of evil are in this house!'
Something odd happened to Pelagea Antonovna at this point. Wringing her
hands she cried :
'Confess, Nikanor! They'll reduce your sentence if you do! '
Eyes bloodshot, Nikanor Ivanovich raised his clenched fists over his
wife's head and screamed :
'Aaah! You stupid bitch! '
Then he crumpled and fell into a chair, having obviously decided to bow
to the inevitable. Meanwhile, out on the landing, Timothy Kondratievich
Kvastsov was pressing first his ear then his eye to the keyhole of the
chairman's front door, burning with curiosity.
Five minutes later the tenants saw the chairman led out into the
courtyard by two men. Nikanor Ivanovich, so they said later, had been
scarcely recognisable--staggering like a drunkard and muttering to himself.
Another hour after that a stranger appeared at flat No. n just when
Timothy Kondratievich, gulping with pleasure, was describing to some other
tenants how the chairman had been whisked away; the stranger beckoned
Timothy Kondratievich out of his kitchen into the hall, said something and
took him away.

10. News from Yalta

As disaster overtook Nikanor Ivanovich in Sadovaya Street, not far from
No. 302А two men were sitting in the office of Rimsky the treasurer of the
Variety Theatre : Rimsky himself and the house manager, Varenukha.
From this large office on the second floor two windows gave on to
Sadovaya and another, just behind the treasurer's back as he sat at his
desk, on to the Variety's garden; it was used in summer and contained
several bars for serving cold drinks, a shooting gallery and an open
promenade. The furniture of the room, apart from the desk, consisted of a
collection of old posters hanging on the wall, a small table with a carafe
of water, four chairs and a stand in one corner supporting a dusty,
long-forgotten model of a stage set. Naturally the office also contained a
small, battered fireproof safe standing to the left of Rimsky's desk.
Rimsky had been in a bad mood all morning. Varenukha, by contrast, was
extremely cheerful and lively, if somewhat nervous. Today, however, there
was no outlet for his energy.
Varenukha had just taken refuge in the treasurer's office from the
complimentary ticket hounds who made his life a misery, especially on the
days when there was a change of programme. And today was one of those days.
As soon as the telephone started to ring Varenukha picked up the receiver
and lied into it:
'Who? Varenukha? He's not here. He's left the theatre.'
'Please try and ring Likhodeyev once more,' said Rimsky testily.
'But he's not at home. I've already sent Karpov; the Hat's empty.'
'I wish to God I knew what was going on! ' hissed Rimsky, fidgeting
with his adding machine.
The door opened and a theatre usher dragged in a thick package of
newly-printed fly-posters, which announced in large red letters on a green
background :
Tonight and All This Week in the Variety Theatre
A Special Act
PROFESSOR WOLAND
Black Magic All Mysteries revealed

As Varenukha stepped back from the poster, which he had propped up on
the model, he admired it and ordered the usher to have all the copies posted
up.
'All right--look sharp,' said Varenukha to the departing usher.
'I don't care for this project at all,' growled Rimsky disagreeably,
staring at the poster through his horn-rims. ' I'm amazed that he was ever
engaged.'
'No, Grigory Danilovich, don't say that! It's a very smart move. All
the fun is in showing how it's done--" the mysteries revealed ".'
'I don't know, I don't know. I don't see any fun in that myself. . .
just like him to dream up something of this sort. If only he'd shown us this
magician. Did you see him? God knows where he's dug him up from.'
It transpired that Varenukha, like Rimsky, had not seen the magician
either. Yesterday Stepa had rushed (' like a madman ', in Rimsky's words)
into the treasurer's office clutching a draft contract, had ordered him to
countersign it and pay Woland his money. The magician had vanished and no
one except Stepa himself had seen him.
Rimsky pulled out his watch, saw that it was five minutes to three and
was seized with fury. Really, this was too much! Likhodeyev had rung at
about eleven o'clock, had said that he would come in about half an hour and
now he had not only failed to appear but had disappeared from his flat.
'It's holding up all my work' snarled Rimsky, tapping a pile of
unsigned papers.

'I suppose he hasn't fallen under a tram, like Berlioz? ' said
Varenukha, holding the receiver to his ear and hearing nothing but a
continual, hopeless buzz as Stepa's telephone rang unanswered.
'It would be a damned good thing if he has . . .' said Rimsky softly
between his teeth.
At that moment in came a woman in a uniform jacket, peaked cap, black
skirt and sneakers. She took a square of white paper and a notebook out of a
little pouch on her belt and enquired :
'Which of you is Variety? Priority telegram for you. Sign here.'
Varenukha scrawled some hieroglyphic in the woman's notebook and as
soon as the door had slammed behind her, opened the envelope. Having read
the telegram he blinked and handed it to Rimsky.
The telegram read as follows: 'yalta то moscow
VARIETY STOP TODAY 1130 PSYCHIATRIC CASE NIGHT-SHIRTED TROUSERED
SHOELESS STAGGERED POLICE STATION ALLEGING SELF LIKHODEYEV MANAGER VARIETY
WIRE YALTA POLICE WHERE LIKHODEYEV.'
'Thanks--and I'm a Dutchman! ' exclaimed Rimsky and added : ' Another
little surprise package! '
'The False Dimitry! ' said Varenukha and spoke into the telephone : '
Telegrams, please. On account. Variety Theatre. Priority. Ready? " Yalta
Police stop Likhodeyev Moscow Rimsky Treasurer."'
Disregarding the Pretender of Yalta, Varenukha tried again to locate
Stepa by telephone and could not, of course, find him anywhere. While he was
still holding the receiver in his hand and wondering where to ring next, the
same woman came in again and handed Varenukha a new envelope. Hastily
opening it Varenukha read the text and whistled. ' What is it now? ' asked
Rimsky, twitching nervously. Varenukha silently passed him the telegram and
the treasurer read the words :
' BEG BELIEVE TRANSPORTED YALTA WOLANDS HYPNOSIS WIRE POLICE
CONFIRMATION MY IDENTITY LIKHODEYEV.'
Rimsky and Varenukha put their heads together, read the telegram again
and stared at one another in silence.
'Come on, come on! ' said the woman irritably. ' Sign here. Then you
can sit and stare at it as long as you like. I've got urgent telegrams to
deliver!'
Without taking his eyes off the telegram Varenukha scribbled in her
book and the woman disappeared.
'You say you spoke to him on the telephone just after eleven? ' said
the house manager in complete bewilderment.
'Yes, extraordinary as it may seem! ' shouted Rimsky. ' But whether I
did or not, he can't be in Yalta now. It's funny.'
'He's drunk . . .' said Varenukha.
'Who's drunk? ' asked Rimsky and they stared at each other again.
There was no doubt that some lunatic or practical joker was
telegraphing from Yalta. But the strange thing was--how did this wit in
Yalta know about Woland, who had only arrived in Moscow the evening before?
How did he know of the connection between Likhodeyev and Woland?
'" Hypnosis ",' muttered Varenukha, repeating one of the words in the
telegram. ' How does he know about Woland? ' He blinked and suddenly shouted
firmly : ' No, of course not. It can't be! Rubbish! '
'Where the hell has this man Woland got to, damn him? ' asked Rimsky.
Varenukha at once got in touch with the tourist bureau and announced to
Rimsky's utter astonishment that Woland was staying in Likhodeyev's flat.
Having then dialled Likhodeyev's flat yet again, Varenukha listened for a
long time as the ringing tone buzzed thickly in the earpiece. In between the
buzzes a distant baritone voice could be heard singing and Varenukha decided
that somewhere the telephone system had got its wires crossed with the radio
station.
'No reply from his flat,' said Varenukha, replacing the receiver on
its rest. ' I'll try once more . . .'
Before he could finish in came the same woman and both men rose to
greet her as this time she took out of her pouch not a white, but a black
sheet of paper.
'This is getting interesting,' said Varenukha through gritted teeth,

watching the woman as she hurried out. Rimsky was the first to look at the
message.
On a dark sheet of photographic paper the following lines were clearly
visible :
'As proof herewith specimen my handwriting and signature wire
confirmation my identity. Have Woland secretly followed. Likhodeyev.'
In twenty years of experience in the theatre Varenukha had seen plenty,
but now he felt his mind becoming paralysed and he could find nothing to say
beyond the commonplace and absurd remark:
‘ It can't be!'
Rimsky reacted differently. He got up, opened the door and bellowed
through it to the usher sitting outside on a stool:
'Don't let anybody in except the telegraph girl,' and locked the door.
He then pulled a sheaf of papers out of his desk drawer and began a
careful comparison of the thick, backward-sloping letters in the photogram
with the writing in Stepa's memoranda and his signatures, with their
typically curly-tailed script. Varenukha, sprawling on the desk, breathed
hotly on Rimsky's cheek.
'It's his handwriting,' the treasurer finally said and Varenukha
echoed him:
'It's his all right.'
Looking at Rimsky's face the house manager noticed a change in it. A
thin man, the treasurer seemed to have grown even thinner and to have aged.
Behind their hornrims his eyes had lost their usual aggressiveness. Now they
showed only anxiety, even alarm.
Varenukha did everything that people are supposed to do in moments of
great stress. He paced up and down the office, twice spread his arms as
though he were being crucified, drank a whole glass of brackish water from
the carafe and exclaimed :
'I don't understand it! I don't understand it! I don't under-stand
it!'
Rimsky stared out of the window, thinking hard. The treasurer was in an
extremely perplexing situation. He had to find an immediate, on-the-spot,
natural solution for a number of very unusual phenomena.
Frowning, the treasurer tried to imagine Stepa in a nightshirt and
without his shoes, climbing that morning at about half past eleven into some
incredibly super-rapid aeroplane and then the same Stepa, also at half past
eleven, standing on Yalta airport in his socks. ...
Perhaps it wasn't Stepa who had telephoned him from his flat? No, that
was Stepa all right! As if he didn't know Stepa's voice. Even if it hadn't
been Stepa talking to him that morning, he had actually seen the man no
earlier than the evening before, when Stepa had rushed in from his own
office waving that idiotic contract and had so annoyed Rimsky by his
irresponsible behaviour. How could he have flown out of Moscow without
saying a word to the theatre? And if he had flown away yesterday evening he
couldn't have reached Yalta before noon today. Or could he?
'How far is it to Yalta? ' asked Rimsky.
Varenukha stopped pacing and cried :
'I've already thought of that! To Sebastopol by rail it's about
fifteen hundred kilometres and it's about another eighty kilometres to
Yalta. It's less by air, of course.' Ню . . . Yes . . . No question of his
having gone by train. What then? An Air Force fighter plane? Who'd let Stepa
on board a fighter in his stockinged feet? And why? Perhaps he'd taken his
shoes off when he got to Yalta? Same problem-- •why? Anyhow, the Air Force
wouldn't let him board a fighter even with his shoes on! No, a fighter was
out of the question too. But the telegram said that he'd appeared at the
police station at half past eleven in the morning and he'd been in Moscow,
talking on the telephone, at ... Just a moment (his watch-face appeared
before Rimsky's eyes) ... He remembered where the hands had been pointing .
. . Horrors! It had been twenty past eleven!
So what was the answer? Supposing that the moment after his telephone
call Stepa had rushed to the airport and got there in, say, five minutes
(which was impossible anyway), then if the aeroplane had taken off at once
it must have covered over a thousand kilometres in five minutes.

Consequently it had been flying at a speed of more than twelve thousand
kilometres per hour! Impossible, ergo--he wasn't in Yalta!
What other explanation could there be? Hypnosis? There Д was no such
hypnosis which could hurl a man a thousand kilometres. Could he be imagining
that he was in Yalta? He might, but would the Yalta police imagine it? No,
no, really, it was absurd! ... But they had telegraphed from Yalta, hadn't
they?
The treasurer's face was dreadful to see. By now someone outside was
twisting and rattling the door handle and the usher could be heard shouting
desperately :
'No, you can't! I wouldn't let you in even if you were to kill me!
They're in conference! '
Rimsky pulled himself together as well as he could, picked up the
telephone receiver and said into it:
'I want to put through a priority call to Yalta.'
'Clever! ' thought Varenukha.
But the call to Yalta never went through. Rimsky put back the receiver
and said :
'The line's out of order--as if on purpose.'
For some reason the faulty line disturbed him a great deal and made him
reflect. After some thought he picked up the receiver again with one hand
and with the other started writing down what he was dictating into the
telephone :
'Priority telegram. From Variety. Yes. To Yalta police. Yes. "Today
approximately 1130 Likhodeyev telephoned me Moscow. Stop. Thereafter failed
appear theatre and unreach-able telephone. Stop. Confirm handwriting. Stop.
Will take suggested measures observe Woland Rimsky Treasurer." '
'Very clever! ' thought Varenukha, but the instant afterwards he
changed his mind : ' No, it's absurd! He can't be in Yalta! '
Rimsky was meanwhile otherwise engaged. He carefully laid all the
telegrams into a pile and together with a copy of his own telegram, put them
into an envelope, sealed it up, wrote a few words on it and handed it to
Varenukha, saying :
'Take this and deliver it at once, Ivan Savyelich. Let them puzzle it
out.'
'Now that really is smart! ' thought Varenukha as he put the envelope
into his briefcase. Then just to be absolutely sure he dialled the number of
Stepa's flat, listened, then winked mysteriously and made a joyful face.
Rimsky craned his neck to listen.
'May I speak to Monsieur Woland, please? ' asked Varenukha sweetly.
'He's busy,' answered the receiver in a quavering voice. ' Who wants
him? '
'Varenukha, house manager of the Variety Theatre.'
'Ivan Savyelich? ' squeaked the earpiece delightedly. ' How very nice
to hear your voice! How are you? '
'Merci,' replied Varenukha in some consternation. ' Who's speaking? '
'This is Koroviev, his assistant and interpreter,' trilled the
receiver. ' At your service, my dear Ivan Savyelich! Just tell me what I can
do for you. What is it? '
'I'm sorry ... is Stepan Bogdanovich Likhodeyev at home? '
'Alas, no, he isn't,' cried the telephone. ' He's gone out.'
'Where to? '
'He went out of town for a car-ride.'
'Wha-at? Car-ride? When is he coming back? '
'He said he just wanted a breath of fresh air and then he'd be back.'
'I see . . .' said Varenukha, perplexed. ' Merci. . . please tell
Monsieur Woland that his act this evening starts after the second interval.'
'Very good. Of course. At once. Immediately. Certainly. I'll tell
him,' came the staccato reply from the earpiece.
'Goodbye,' said Varenukha, in amazement.
'Please accept,' said the telephone, ' my warmest and most sincere
good wishes for a brilliant success! It will be a great show--great! '
'There you are--I told you so! ' said the house manager excitedly. '
He hasn't gone to Yalta, he's just gone out of town for a drive.'

'Well, if that's the case,' said the treasurer, turning pale with
anger, ' he has behaved like an absolute swine!'
Here the manager leaped into the air and gave such a shout that Rimsky
shuddered.
'I remember! I remember now! There's a new Turkish restaurant out at
Pushkino--it's just opened--and it's called the " Yalta "! Don't you see? He
went there, got drunk and he's been sending us telegrams from there!'
'Well, he really has overdone it this time,' replied Rimsky, his cheek
twitching and real anger flashing in his eyes. ' This little jaunt is going
to cost him dear.' He suddenly stopped and added uncertainly : ' But what
about those telegrams from the police?'
'A lot of rubbish! More of his practical jokes,' said Varenukha
confidently and asked : ' Shall I take this envelope all the same? '
'You must,' replied Rimsky.
Again the door opened to admit the same woman. ' Oh, not her! ' sighed
Rimsky to himself. Both men got up and walked towards her.
This time the telegram said :
'THANKS CONFIRMATION IDENTITY WIRE ME FIVE HUNDRED ROUBLES POLICE
STATION FLYING MOSCOW TOMORROW LIKHODEYEV.'
'He's gone mad,' said Varenukha weakly. Rimsky rattled his key-chain,
took some money out of the safe, counted out five hundred roubles, rang the
bell, gave the money to the usher and sent her off to the post office.
'But Grigory Danilovich,' said Varenukha, unable to believe his eyes,
' if you ask me you're throwing that money away.'
'It'll come back,' replied Rimsky quietly, ' and then he'll pay dearly
for this little picnic.' And pointing at Varenukha's briefcase he said :
'Go on, Ivan Savyelich, don't waste any time.' Varenukha picked up his
briefcase and trotted off. He went down to the ground floor, saw a very long
queue outside the box office and heard from the cashier that she was
expecting to have to put up the ' House Full' notices that evening because
they were being positively overwhelmed since the special bill had been
posted up. Varenukha told her to be sure not to sell the thirty best seats
in the boxes and stalls, then rushed out of the box office, fought off the
people begging for free tickets and slipped into his own office to pick up
his cap. At that moment the telephone rang. ' Yes? ' he shouted.
'Ivan Savyelich? ' enquired the receiver in an odious nasal voice.
'He's not in the theatre! ' Varenukha was just about to shout, but the
telephone cut him short:
'Don't play the fool, Ivan Savyelich, and listen. You are not to take
those telegrams anywhere or show them to anybody.'
'Who's that? ' roared Varenukha. ' Kindly stop playing these tricks!
You're going to be shown up before long. What's your telephone number? '
'Varenukha,' insisted the horrible voice. ' You understand Russian
don't you? Don't take those telegrams.'
'So you refuse to stop this game do you? ' shouted the house manager
in a rage. ' Now listen to me--you're going to pay for this!' He went on
shouting threats but stopped when he realised that no one was listening to
him on the other end.
At that moment his office began to darken. Varenukha ran out, slammed
the door behind him and went out into the garden through the side door.
He felt excited and full of energy. After that last insolent telephone
call he no longer had any doubt that some gang of hooligans was playing some
nasty practical joke and that the joke was connected with Likhodeyev's
disappearance. The house manager felt inspired with the urge to unmask the
villains and, strange as it may seem, he had a premonition that he was going
to enjoy it. It was a longing to be in the limelight, the bearer of
sensational news.
Out in the garden the wind blew in his face and threw sand in his eyes
as if it were trying to bar his way or warn him. A window-pane on the second
floor slammed shut with such force that it nearly broke the glass, the tops
of the maples and poplars rustled alarmingly. It grew darker and colder.
Varenukha wiped his eyes and noticed that a yellowish-centred thundercloud
was scudding low over Moscow. From the distance came a low rumble.
Although Varenukha was in a hurry, an irresistible urge made him turn

aside for a second into the open-air men's toilet just to check that the
electrician had replaced a missing electric lamp.
Running past the shooting gallery, he passed through a thick clump of
lilac which screened the blue-painted lavatory. The electrician seemed to
have done his job : the lamp in the men's toilet had been screwed into its
socket and the protective wire screen replaced, but the house manager was
annoyed to notice that even in the dark before the thunderstorm the
pencilled graffiti on the walls were still clearly visible.
'What a . . .' he began, then suddenly heard a purring voice behind
him:
'Is that you, Ivan Savyelich? '
Varenukha shuddered, turned round and saw before him a shortish, fat
creature with what seemed like the face of a cat.
'Yes . . .' replied Varenukha coldly.
'Delighted to meet you,' answered the stout, cat-like personage.
Suddenly it swung round and gave Varenukha such a box on the ear that his
cap flew off and vanished without trace into one of the lavatory pans.
For a moment the blow made the toilet shimmer with a flickering light.
A clap of thunder came from the sky. Then there was a second flash and
another figure materialised, short but athletically built, with fiery red
hair . . . one wall eye, a fang protruding from his mouth ... He appeared to
be left-handed, as he fetched the house manager a shattering clout on his
other ear. The sky rumbled again in reply and rain started to drench the
wooden roof.
'Look here, corn . . .' whispered Varenukha, staggering. It at once
occurred to him that the word ' comrades ' hardly fitted these bandits who
went around assaulting people in public conveniences, so he groaned instead
'. . . citizens . . . ', realised that they didn't even deserve to be called
that and got a third fearful punch. This time he could not see who had hit
him, as blood was spurting from his nose and down his shirt.
'What have you got in your briefcase, louse? ' shouted the cat-figure.
' Telegrams? Weren't you warned by telephone not to take them anywhere? I'm
asking you--weren't you warned?'
'Yes ... I was . . . warned,' panted Varenukha.
'And you still went? Gimme the briefcase, you skunk! ' said the other
creature in the same nasal voice that had come through the telephone, and
wrenched the briefcase out of Varenukha's trembling hands.
Then they both grabbed the house manager by the arms and frog-marched
him out of the garden and along Sadovaya Street. The storm was in full
spate, water was roaring and gurgling down the drain-holes in great bubbling
waves, it poured off the roofs from the overflowing gutters and out of the
drain pipes in foaming torrents. Every living person had vanished from the
street and there was no one to help Ivan Savyelich. In second, leaping over
muddy streams and lit by flashes of lightning the bandits had dragged the
half-dead Varenukha to No302-A and fled into the doorway, where two barefoot
women stood pressed against the wall, holding their shoes and stockings in
their hands. Then they rushed across to staircase 6, carried the nearly
insane Varenukha up to the fifth floor and threw him to the ground in the
familiar semi-darkness of the hallway of Stepa Likhodeyev's flat.
The two robbers vanished and in their place appeared a completely naked
girl--a redhead with eyes that burned with a phosphorescent glitter.
Varenukha felt that this was the most terrible thing that had ever
happened to him. With a groan he turned and leaned on the wall. The girl
came right up to him and put her hands on his shoulders. Varenukha's hair
stood on end. Even through the cold, soaking wet material of his coat he
could feel that those palms were even colder, that they were as cold as ice.
'Let me give you a kiss,' said the girl tenderly, her gleaming eyes
close to his. Varenukha lost consciousness before he could feel her kiss.

11. The Two Ivans

The wood on the far bank of the river, which an hour before had glowed
in the May sunshine, had now grown dim, had blurred and dissolved.
Outside, water was pouring down in solid sheets. Now and again there
came a rift in the sky, the heavens split and the patient's room was flooded
with a terrifying burst of light.
Ivan was quietly weeping as he sat on his bed and stared out at the
boiling, muddied river. At every clap of thunder he cried miserably and
covered his face with his hands. Sheets of paper, covered with his writing,
blew about on the floor.
The poet's efforts to compose a report on the terrible professor had
come to nothing. As soon as he had been given a stub of a pencil and some
paper by the fat nurse, whose name was Pras-kovya Fyodorovna, he had rubbed
his hands in a businesslike way and arranged his bedside table for work. The
beginning sounded rather well:
'To the Police. From Ivan Nikolayich Bezdomny, Member of massolit.
Statement. Yesterday evening I arrived at Patriarch's Ponds with the late M.
A. Berlioz. . . .'
Here the poet stumbled, chiefly because of the words ' the late '. It
sounded wrong--how could he have ' arrived' with ' the late '? Dead people
can't walk. If he wrote like this they really would think he was mad. So
Ivan Nikolayich made some corrections, which resulted in : '. . . with M. A.
Berlioz, later deceased.' He did not like that either, so he wrote a third
version and that was even worse than the previous two:
'. . . with Berlioz, who fell under a tram . . .' Here he thought of
the composer of the same name and felt obliged to add : ' ... not the
composer.'
Struggling with these two Berliozes, Ivan crossed it all out and
decided to begin straight away with a striking phrase which would
immediately catch the reader's attention, so he first described how the cat
had jumped on the tram and then described the episode of the severed head.
The head and the professor's forecast reminded him of Pontius Pilate, so to
sound more convincing Ivan decided to give the story of the Procurator in
full, from the moment when he had emerged in his white, red-lined cloak into
the arcade of Herod's palace.
Ivan worked hard. He crossed out what he had written, put in new words
and even tried to draw a sketch of Pontius Pilate, then one showing the cat
walking on its hind legs. But his drawings were hopeless and the further he
went the more confused his statement grew.
By the time the storm had begun, Ivan felt that he was exhausted and
would never be able to write a statement. His windblown sheets of paper were
in a complete muddle and he began to weep, quietly and bitterly. The kind
nurse Praskovya Fyodorovna called on the poet during the storm and was
worried to find him crying. She closed the blinds so that the lightning
should not frighten the patient, picked up the sheets of paper and went off
with them to look for the doctor.
The doctor appeared, gave Ivan an injection in his arm and assured him
that he would soon stop crying, that it would pass, everything would be all
right and he would forget all about it.
The doctor was right. Soon the wood across the river looked as it
always did. The weather cleared until every single tree stood out against a
sky which was as blue as before and the river subsided. His injection at
once made Ivan feel less depressed. The poet lay quietly down and gazed at
the rainbow stretched across the sky.
He lay there until evening and did not even notice how the rainbow
dissolved, how the sky faded and saddened, how the wood turned to black.
When he had drunk his hot milk, Ivan lay down again. He was amazed to
notice how his mental condition had changed. The memory of the diabolical
cat had grown indistinct, he was no longer frightened by the thought of the
decapitated head. Ivan started to muse on the fact that the clinic really
wasn't such a bad place, that Stravinsky was very clever and famous and that
he was an extremely pleasant man to deal with. The evening air, too, was

sweet and fresh after the storm.
The asylum was asleep. The white frosted-glass bulbs in the silent
corridors were extinguished and in their place glowed the weak blue
night-lights. The nurses' cautious footsteps were heard less and less
frequently walking the rubber-tiled floor of the corridor.
Ivan now lay in sweet lassitude ; glancing at his bedside lamp, then at
the dim ceiling light and at the moon rising in the dark, he talked to
himself.
'I wonder why I got so excited about Berlioz falling under that tram?
' the poet reasoned. ' After all he's dead, and we all die some time. It's
not as if I were a relation or a really close friend either. When you come
to think of it I didn't even know the man very well. What did I really know
about him? Nothing, except that he was bald and horribly talkative. So,
gentlemen,' went on Ivan, addressing an imaginary audience,' let us consider
the following problem : why, I should like to know, did I get in such a rage
with that mysterious professor or magician with his empty, black eye? Why
did I chase after him like a fool in those underpants and holding a candle?
Why the ridiculous scene in the restaurant? '
'Wait a moment, though! ' said the old Ivan severely to the new Ivan
in a voice that was not exactly inside him and not quite by his ear. ' He
did know in advance that Berlioz was going to have his head cut off, didn't
he? Isn't that something to get upset about? '
'What do you mean? ' objected the new Ivan. ' I quite agree that it's
a nasty business--a child could see that. But he's a mysterious, superior
being--that's what makes it so interesting. Think of it--a man who knew
Pontius Pilate! Instead of creating that ridiculous scene at Patriarch's
wouldn't it have been
rather more intelligent to ask him politely what happened next to
Pilate and that prisoner Ha-Notsri? And I had to behave like an idiot! Of
course it's a serious matter to kill the editor of a magazine. But
still--the magazine won't close down just because of that, will it? Man is
mortal and as the professor so rightly said mortality can come so suddenly.
So God rest his soul and let's get ourselves another editor, perhaps one
who's even more of a chatterbox than Berlioz!'
After dozing for a while the new Ivan said spitefully to the old Ivan:
'And how do I look after this affair? '
'A fool,' distinctly said a bass voice that belonged to neither of the
Ivans and was extremely like the professor's.
Ivan, somehow not offended by the word 'fool' but even pleasantly
surprised by it, smiled and sank into a half-doze. Sleep crept up on him. He
had a vision of a palm tree on its elephantine leg and a cat passed by--not
a terrible cat but a nice one and Ivan was just about to fall asleep when
suddenly the grille slid noiselessly aside. A mysterious figure appeared on
the moonlit balcony and pointed a threatening finger at Ivan.
Quite unafraid Ivan sat up in bed and saw a man on the balcony.
Pressing his finger to his lips the man whispered : ' Shh!'

12.Black Magic Revealed

A little man with a crimson pear-shaped nose, in a battered yellow
bowler hat, check trousers and patent leather boots pedalled on to the
Variety stage on a bicycle. As the band played a foxtrot he rode round in
circles a few times, then gave a triumphant yelp at which the bicycle reared
up with its front wheel in the air. After a few rounds on the back wheel
alone, the man stood on his head, unscrewed the front wheel and threw it
into the wings. He then carried on with one wheel, turning the pedals with
his hands.
Next a fat blonde girl, wearing a sweater and a very brief skirt strewn

with sequins, came in riding a long metal pole with a saddle on the top and
a single wheel at the bottom. As they met the man gave a welcoming cry and
doffed his bowler hat with his foot.
Finally a little boy of about seven with the face of an old man sneaked
in between the two adults on a tiny two-wheeler to which was fixed an
enormous motor-car horn.
After a few figures of eight the whole troupe, to an urgent roll of
drums from the orchestra, rode at full tilt towards the front of the stage.
The spectators in the front rows gasped and ducked, fully expecting all
three to crash, cycles and all, into the orchestra pit, but they stopped at
the very second that their front wheels threatened to skid into the pit on
to the heads of the musicians. With a loud cry of' Allez-oop! ' the three
cyclists leaped from their machines and bowed, while the blonde blew kisses
to the audience and the little boy played a funny tune on his horn.
The auditorium rocked with applause, the blue curtain fell and the
cyclists vanished. The lighted green ' Exit' signs went out and the white
globes began to glow brighter and brighter in the web of girders under the
dome. The second and last interval had begun.
The only man unaffected by the Giulli family's marvels of cycling
technique was Grigory Danilovich Rimsky. He sat alone in his office, biting
his thin lips, his face twitching spasmodically. First Likhodeyev had
vanished in the most bizarre circumstances and now Varenukha had suddenly
disappeared. Rinsky knew where Varenukha had been going to--but the man had
simply gone and had never come back. He shrugged his shoulders and muttered
to himself:
• But why?!'
Nothing would have been simpler for a sensible, practical man like
Rimsky to have telephoned the place where Varenukha had gone and to have
found out what had happened to him, yet it was ten o'clock that evening
before he could bring himself to do so.
At ten Rimsky finally took a grip on himself and picked up the
telephone receiver. The telephone was dead. An usher reported that all the
other telephones in the building were out of order. This annoying but hardly
supernatural occurrence seemed to shock Rimsky, although secretly he was
glad, because it absolved him from the need to telephone.
As the little red light above the treasurer's head started flashing to
show that the interval was beginning, an usher came in and announced that
the foreign magician had arrived. Rimsky's expression changed and he scowled
with a mixture of anxiety and irritation. As the only member of the
management left in the theatre, it was his duty to go backstage and receive
the guest artiste.
As the warning bells rang, inquisitive people were peeping into the
star dressing room. Among them were jugglers in bright robes and turbans, a
roller-skater in a knitted cardigan, a comedian with a powdered white face
and a make-up man. The celebrated guest artiste amazed everyone with his
unusually long, superbly cut tail coat and by wearing a black domino. Even
more astounding were the black magician's two companions : a tall man in
checks with an unsteady pince-nez and a fat black cat which walked into the
dressing room on its hind legs and casually sat down on the divan, blinking
in the light of the unshaded lamps round the make-up mirror.
With a forced smile which only made him look acidly disagreeable,
Rimsky bowed to the silent magician sitting beside the cat on the divan.
There were no handshakes, but the man in checks introduced himself smoothly
as ' the assistant'. This gave the treasurer an unpleasant shock, as there
had not been a word in the contract about an assistant.
Grigory Danilovich enquired stiffly where the professor's equipment
might be.
'Why, bless you my dear sir,' replied the magician's assistant, ' we
have all the equipment we need with us now--look! Eins, zvei, drei!'
Flourishing his long, knotty fingers in front of Rimsky's eyes he made
a pass beside the cat's ear and pulled out of it Rimsky's gold watch and
chain, which until that moment had been sitting under the treasurer's
buttoned jacket in his waistcoat pocket with the chain threaded through a
buttonhole.

Rimsky involuntarily clutched his stomach, the spectators gasped and
the make-up man, glancing in from the corridor, clucked with approval.
'Your watch, sir? There you are,' said the man in checks. Smiling
nonchalantly, he proffered the watch to its owner on his dirty palm.
'I wouldn't sit next to him in a tram,' whispered the comedian
cheerfully to the make-up man.
But the cat put the watch trick in the shade. Suddenly getting up from
the divan it walked on its hind legs to the dressing table, pulled the
stopper out of a carafe with its forepaw, poured out a glass of water, drank
it, replaced the stopper and wiped its whiskers with a make-up cloth.
Nobody even gasped. Their mouths fell open and the make-up man
whispered admiringly: ' Bravo . ..'
The last warning bell rang and everybody, excited by the prospect of a
good act, tumbled out of the dressing room.
A minute later the house-lights went out, the footlights lit up the
fringe of the curtain with a red glow and in the lighted gap between the
tabs the audience saw a fat, jolly, clean-shaven man in stained tails and a
grubby white dicky. It was Moscow's best known compere, George Bengalsky.
'And now, ladies and gentlemen,' said Bengalsky, smiling his boyish
smile, ' you are about to see . . .' Here Bengalsky broke off and started
again in a completely different tone of voice : ' I see that our audience
has increased in numbers since the interval. Half Moscow seems to be here
tonight! D'you know, I met a friend of mine the other day and I said to him
: " Why didn't you come and see our show? Half the town was there last
night." And he said : " I live in the other half! " ' Bengalsky paused for
the laugh, but none came so he went on : ' Well, as I was saying, you are
about to see a very famous artiste from abroad, M'sieur Woland, with a
session of black magic. Of course we know, don't we . . .' Bengalsky smiled
confidentially, ' that there's no such thing really. It's all
superstition--or rather Maestro Woland is a past master of the art of
conjuring, as you will see from the most interesting part of his act in
which he reveals the mysteries of his technique. And now, ladies and
gentlemen, since none of us can bear the suspense any longer, I give you . .
. Monsieur Woland! . . .'
Having said his feeble piece, Bengalsky put his hands palm to palm and
raised them in a gesture of welcome towards the gap in the curtain, which
then rose with a soft rustle.
The entry of the magician with his tall assistant and his cat, who
trotted on stage on his hind legs, pleased the audience greatly. ' Armchair,
please,' said Woland quietly and instantly an armchair appeared on stage
from nowhere. The magician sat down. ' Tell me, my dear Faggot,' Woland
enquired of the check-clad buffoon, who apparently had another name besides
' Koroviev,':
'do you find the people of Moscow much changed? ' The magician nodded
towards the audience, still silent with astonishment at seeing an armchair
materialise from nowhere.
'I do, messire,' replied Faggot-Koroviev in a low voice.
'You are right. The Muscovites have changed considerably . . .
outwardly, I mean ... as, too, has the city itself. . . Not just the
clothes, but now they have all these . . . what d'you call 'em . . .
tramways, cars . . .'
'Buses,' prompted Faggot respectfully.
The audience listened intently to this conversation, assuming it to be
the prelude to some magic tricks. The wings were full of actors and stage
hands and among their faces could be seen the pale, strained features of
Rimsky.
Bengalsky's face, lurking in a corner of the stage, began to show
consternation. With an imperceptible raise of one eyebrow he seized the
opportunity of a pause in the dialogue to interject:
'Our guest artiste from abroad is obviously delighted with Moscow's
technological progress.' This was accompanied by a smile for the stalls and
a smile for the gallery.
Woland, Faggot and the cat turned their heads towards the compere.
'Did I say I was delighted? ' the magician asked Faggot.

'You said nothing of the kind, messire,' replied the latter.
'Then what is the man talking about? '
'He was simply telling lies! ' announced the chequered clown in a loud
voice for the whole theatre to hear and turning to Bengalsky he added : '
D'you hear--you're a liar! '
There was a burst of laughter from the gallery as Bengalsky spluttered,
his eyes popping with indignation.
'But naturally I am not so much interested in the buses and telephones
and such like . . .'
'Apparatus,' prompted Faggot.
'Precisely, thank you,' drawled the magician in a deep bass, ' as in
the much more important question : have the Muscovites changed inwardly? '
'A vital question indeed, sir.'
In the wings, glances were exchanged, shoulders shrugged; banker's tape
and marked ' One Thousand Roubles'. His neighbours crowded round as he
picked at the wrapping with his fingernail to find out whether it was real
money or a stage prop.
'My God--it's real money!' came a joyful shout from the gallery.
'I wish you'd play cards with me if vou've any more packs like that
one,' begged a fat man in the middle of the stalls.
'Avec plaisir!' replied Faggot. ' But why should you be the only one?
You shall all take part! Everybody look up, please! One! ' A pistol appeared
in his hand. ' Two! ' the pistol was pointed upwards. ' Three! ' There was a
flash, a bang, and immediately a cascade of white pieces of paper began to
float down from the dome above the auditorium.
Turning over and over, some were blown aside and landed in the gallery,
some fell towards the orchestra pit or the stage. A few seconds later the
shower of money reached the stalls and the audience began catching it.
Hundreds of hands were raised as the audience held the notes up to the
light from the stage and found that the watermarks were absolutely genuine.
Their smell left no doubt: it was the uniquely delicious smell of
newly-printed money. First amusement then wonder seized the entire theatre.
From all over the house, amid gasps and delighted laughter, came the words '
money, money! ' One man was already crawling in the aisle and fumbling under
the seats. Several more were standing up on their seats to catch the
drifting, twisting banknotes as they fell.
Gradually a look of perplexity came over the expressions of the police,
and the artistes backstage openly pressed forward from the wings. From the
dress circle a voice was heard shouting:
'Let go! It's mine--I caught it first! ', followed by another voice :
' Stop pushing and grabbing or I'll punch your face in! ' There was a
muffled crash. A policeman's helmet appeared in the dress circle and a
member of the audience was led away. The excitement rose and might have got
out of hand if Faggot had not stopped the rain of money by suddenly blowing
into the air.
Two young men, grinning purposefully, left their seats and made
straight for the bar. A loud buzz filled the theatre : the audience was
galvanised with excitement and in an effort to control the situation
Bengalsky stirred himself and appeared on stage. With a tremendous effort of
self-mastery he went through his habitual motion of washing his hands and in
his most powerful voice began:
'We have just seen, ladies and gentlemen, a case of so-called mass
hypnosis. A purely scientific experiment, demonstrating better than anything
else that there is nothing supernatural about magic. We shall ask Maestro
Woland to show us how he did that experiment. You will now see, ladies and
gentlemen, how those apparent banknotes will vanish as suddenly as they
appeared.'
He began to clap, but he was alone. A confident smile appeared on his
face, but the look in his eyes was one of entreaty.
The audience did not care for Bengalsky's speech. Faggot broke the
silence :
'And that was a case of so-called fiddlesticks,' he declared in a loud
goatish bray. ' The banknotes, ladies and gentlemen, are real.'
'Bravo! ' abruptly roared a bass from high up in the gallery.

'This man,' Faggot pointed at Bengalsky, ' is starting to bore me. He
sticks his nose in everywhere without being asked and ruins the whole act.
What shall we do with him? '
'Cut off his head! ' said a stern voice.
'What did you say, sir? ' was Faggot's instant response to this savage
proposal. ' Cut off his head? That's an idea! Behemoth! ' he shouted to the
cat. ' Do your stuff! Eins, zvei, drei!! '
Then the most incredible thing happened. The cat's fur stood on end and
it uttered a harrowing ' miaaow! ' It crouched, then leaped like a panther
straight for Bengalsky's chest and from there to his head. Growling, the cat
dug its claws into the compere's glossy hair and with a wild screech it
twisted the head clean off the neck in two turns. Two and a half thousand
people screamed as one. Fountains of blood from the severed arteries in the
neck spurted up and drenched the man's shirtfront and tails. The headless
body waved its legs stupidly and sat on the ground. Hysterical shrieks rang
out through the auditorium. The cat handed the head to Faggot who picked it
up by the hair and showed it to the audience. The head moaned desperately :
'Fetch a doctor!'
'Will you go on talking so much rubbish?' said Faggot threateningly to
the weeping head.
'No, I promise I won't! ' croaked the head. ' For God's sake stop
torturing him! ' a woman's voice from a box suddenly rang out above the
turmoil and the magician turned towards the sound.
'Well, ladies and gentlemen, shall we forgive him? ' asked Faggot,
turning to the audience.
'Yes, forgive him, forgive him! ' The cries came at first from a few
individual voices, mostly women, then merged into a chorus with the men.
'What is your command, messire? ' Faggot asked the masked professor.
'Well, now,' replied the magician reflectively. ' They're people like
any others. They're over-fond of money, but then they always were . . .
Humankind loves money, no matter if it's made of leather, paper, bronze or
gold. They're thoughtless, of course . . . but then they sometimes feel
compassion too .... they're ordinary people, in fact they remind me very
much of their predecessors, except that the housing shortage has soured them
. . .' And he shouted the order : ' Put back his head.'
Taking careful aim the cat popped the head back on its neck, where it
sat as neatly as if head and body had never been parted. Most amazing of
all--there was not even a scar on the neck. The cat wiped the tailcoat and
shirtfront with its paw and every trace of blood vanished. Faggot lifted the
seated Bengalsky to his feet, shoved a bundle of money into his coat pocket
and led him off stage, saying :
'Go on--off you go, it's more fun without you!'
Gazing round in a daze and staggering, the compere got no further than
the fire-brigade post and collapsed. He cried miserably:
'My head, my head . . .'
Among those who rushed to help him was Rimsky. The compere was weeping,
snatching at something in the air and mumbling :
'Give me back my head, my head . . . You can have my flat, you can
have all my pictures, only give me back my head . . .! '
An usher ran for the doctor. They tried to lay Bengalsky on a divan in
his dressing-room, but he resisted and became violent. An ambulance was
called. When the unfortunate compere had been removed Rimsky ran back to the
stage, where new miracles were in progress. It was then, or perhaps a little
earlier, that the magician and his faded armchair vanished from the stage.
The audience did not notice this at all, as they were absorbed by Faggot's
wonderful tricks.
Having seen the compere off the stage. Faggot announced to the
audience:
'Now that we have disposed of that old bore, we shall open a shop for
the ladies! '
In a moment half the stage was covered with Persian carpets, some huge
mirrors and a row of showcases, in which the audience was astounded to see a
collection of Parisian dresses that were the last word in chic. In other
showcases were hundreds of ladies' hats, some with feathers and some

without, hundreds of pairs of shoes--black shoes, white shoes, yellow shoes,
leather shoes, satin shoes, suede shoes, buckled shoes and shoes studded
with costume jewellery. Beside the shoes there were flacons of scent, piles
of handbags made of buckskin, satin and silk, and next to them piles of gilt
lipstick-holders.
A red-haired girl in a black evening dress who had suddenly appeared
from nowhere, her beauty only marred by a curious scar on her neck, smiled
from the showcases with a proprietorial smile. With an engaging leer Faggot
announced that the firm would exchange, absolutely free of charge, any
lady's old dress and shoes for model dresses and shoes from Paris, adding
that the offer included handbags and the odds and ends that go in them.
The cat began bowing and scraping, its forepaw gesturing like a
commissionaire opening a door.
In a sweet though slightly hoarse voice the girl made an announcement
which sounded rather cryptic but which, judging from the faces of the women
in the stalls, was very enticing :
'Guerlain, Chanel, Mitsouko, Narcisse Noir, Chanel Number Five,
evening dresses, cocktail dresses . . .'
Faggot bent double, the cat bowed and the girl opened the glass-fronted
showcases.
'Step up, please! ' cried Faggot. ' Don't be shy! '
The audience began to fidget, but no one dared mount the stage. At last
a brunette emerged from the tenth row of the stalls and smiling nonchalantly
walked up the side stairs on to the stage.
'Bravo! ' cried Faggot. ' Our first customer! Behemoth, a chair for
the lady! Shall we start with the shoes, madam? '
The brunette sat down and Faggot at once spread out a whole heap of
shoes on the carpet in front of her. She took off her right shoe, tried on a
lilac one, tested it with a walk on the carpet and inspected the heel.
'Won't they pinch? ' she enquired thoughtfully.
Offended, Faggot cried:
'Oh, come, now!' and the cat gave an insulted miaow.
'I'll take them, monsieur,' said the brunette with dignity as she put
on the other shoe of the pair. Her old shoes were thrown behind a curtain,
followed by the girl herself, the redhead, and Faggot carrying several model
dresses on coathangers. The cat busied itself with helping and hung a tape
measure round its neck for greater effect.
A minute later the brunette emerged from behind the curtain in a dress
that sent a gasp through the entire auditorium. The bold girl, now very much
prettier, stopped in front of a mirror, wriggled her bare shoulders, patted
her hair and twisted round to try and see her back view.
'The firm begs you to accept this as a souvenir,' said Faggot, handing
the girl an open case containing a flacon of scent.
'Merci,' replied the girl haughtily and walked down the steps to the
stalls. As she went back to her seat people jumped up to touch her
scent-bottle.
The ice was broken. Women from all sides poured on to the stage. In the
general hubbub of talk, laughter and cries a man's voice was heard, ' I
won't let you! ' followed by a woman's saying : ' Let go of my arm, you
narrow-minded little tyrant! ' Women were disappearing behind the curtain,
leaving their old dresses there and emerging in new ones. A row of women was
sitting on gilt-legged stools trying on new shoes. Faggot was on his knees,
busy with a shoe-horn, while the cat, weighed down by handbags and shoes,
staggered from the showcases to the stools and back again, the girl with the
scarred neck bustled to and fro, entering so much into the spirit of it all
that she was soon chattering away in nothing but French. Strangely enough
all the women understood her at once, even those who knew not a word of
French.
To everybody's astonishment, a lone man climbed on to the stage. He
announced that his wife had a cold and asked to be given something to take
home to her. To prove that he was really married he offered to show his
passport. This conscientious husband was greeted with a roar of laughter.
Faggot declared that he believed him even without his passport and handed
the man two pairs of silk stockings. The cat spontaneously added a pot of

cold cream.
Latecomers still mounted the steps as a stream of happy women in ball
dresses, pyjama suits embroidered with dragons, severe tailor-mades and hats
pranced back into the auditorium.
Then Faggot announced that because it was so late, in exactly a
minute's time the shop would close until to-morrow evening. This produced an
incredible scuffle on stage. Without trying them on, women grabbed any shoes
within reach. One woman hurtled behind the screen, threw off her clothes and
sei2ed the first thing to hand--a silk dress patterned with enormous bunches
of flowers--grabbed a dressing gown and for good measure scooped up two
flacons of scent. Exactly a minute later a pistol shot rang out, the mirrors
disappeared, the showcases and stools melted away, carpet and curtain
vanished into thin air. Last to disappear was the mountain of old dresses
and shoes. The stage was bare and empty again.
At this point a new character joined the cast. A pleasant and extremely
self-confident baritone was heard from Box No. 2 :
'It's high time, sir, that you showed the audience how you do your
tricks, especially the bank-note trick. We should also like to see the
compere back on stage. The audience is concerned about him.'
The baritone voice belonged to none other than the evening's guest of
honour, Arkady Apollonich Sempleyarov, chairman of the Moscow Theatres'
Acoustics Commission.
Arkady Apollonich was sharing his box with two ladies--one elderly, who
was expensively and fashionably dressed, the other young and pretty and more
simply dressed. The first, as was later established when the official report
was compiled, was Arkady Apollonich's wife and the other a distant relative
of his, an aspiring young actress from Saratov who lodged in the
Sempleyarovs' flat.
'I beg your pardon,' replied Faggot. ' I'm sorry, but there's nothing
to reveal. It's all quite plain.'
'Excuse me, but I don't agree. An explanation is essential, otherwise
your brilliant act will leave a painful impression. The audience demands an
explanation . . .'
'The audience,' interrupted the insolent mountebank, ' has not, to my
knowledge, demanded anything of the sort. However, in view of your
distinguished position, Arkady Apollonich, I will--since you insist--reveal
something of our technique. To do so, will you allow me time for another
short number? '
'Of course,' replied Arkady Apollonich patronisingly. ' But you must
show how it's done.'
'Very well, sir, very well. Now--may I ask where you were yesterday
evening, Arkady Apollonich? '
At this impertinent question Arkady Apollonich's expression underwent a
complete and violent change.
'Yesterday evening Arkady Apollonich was at a meeting of the Acoustics
Commission,' said his wife haughtily. ' Surely that has nothing to do with
magic? '
'Ош, madame,' replied Faggot, ' it has, but you naturally do not know
why. As for the meeting, you are quite wrong. When he went to the
meeting--which, incidentally, was never scheduled to take place
yesterday--Arkady Apollonich dismissed his chauffeur at the Acoustics
Commission (a hush came over the whole theatre) and took a bus to
Yelokhovskaya Street where he called on an actress called Militsa Andreyevna
Pokobatko from the local repertory theatre and spent about four hours in her
flat.'
'Oh!' The painful cry rang out from complete silence.
Suddenly Arkady Apollonich's young cousin burst into a low, malicious
laugh.
'Of course!' she exclaimed. ' I've suspected him for a long time. Now
I see why that tenth-rate ham got the part of Luisa!' And with a sudden wave
of her arm she hit Arkady Apollonich on the head with a short, fat, mauve
umbrella.
The vile Faggot, who was none other than Koroviev, shouted :
'There, ladies and gentlemen, is your revelation for you, as requested

so insistently by Arkady Apollonich!'
'How dare you hit Arkady Apollonich, you little baggage? ' said the
wife grimly, rising in the box to her full gigantic height.
The young girl was seized with another outburst of Satanic laughter.
'I've as much right,' she replied laughing, ' to hit him as you have!
' A second dull crack was heard as another umbrella bounced off Arkady
Apollonich's head.
'Police! Arrest her! ' roared Madame Sempleyarov in a terrifying
voice.
Here the cat bounded up to the footlights and announced in a human
voice :
'That concludes the evening! Maestro! Finale, please! ' The dazed
conductor, scarcely aware of what he was doing, waved his baton and the
orchestra struck up, or rather murdered a disorganised excuse for a march,
normally sung to obscene but very funny words. However, it was quickly
drowned in the ensuing uproar. The police ran to the Sempleyarovs' box,
curious spectators climbed on to the ledge to watch, there were explosions
of infernal laughter and wild cries, drowned by the golden crash of cymbals
from the orchestra.
Suddenly the stage was empty. The horrible Faggot and the sinister cat
Behemoth melted into the air and disappeared, just as the magician had
vanished earlier in his shabby armchair.

13. Enter the Hero

Ivan swung his legs off the bed and stared. A man was standing on the
balcony, peering cautiously into the room. He was aged about thirty-eight,
clean-shaven and dark, with a sharp nose, restless eyes and a lock of hair
that tumbled over his forehead.
The mysterious visitor listened awhile then, satisfied that Ivan was
alone, entered the room. As he came in Ivan noticed that the man was wearing
hospital clothes--pyjamas, slippers and a reddish-brown dressing gown thrown
over his shoulders.
The visitor winked at Ivan, put a bunch of keys into his pocket and
asked in a whisper : ' May I sit down? ' Receiving an affirmative reply he
settled in the armchair.
'How did you get in here? ' Ivan whispered in obedience to a warning
finger. ' The grilles on the windows are locked, aren't they? '
'The grilles are locked,' agreed the visitor. ' Praskovya Fyodorovna
is a dear person but alas, terribly absent-minded. A month ago I removed
this bunch of keys from her, which has given me the freedom of the balcony.
It stretches along the whole floor, so that I can call on my neighbours
whenever I feel like it.'
'If you can get out on to the balcony you can run away. Or is it too
high to jump? ' enquired Ivan with interest.
'No,' answered the visitor firmly, ' I can't escape from here. Not
because it's too high but because I've nowhere to go.' After a pause he
added : ' So here we are.'
'Here we are,' echoed Ivan, gazing into the man's restless brown eyes.
'Yes . . .' The visitor grew suddenly anxious. ' You're not violent, I
hope? You see, I can't bear noise, disturbance, violence or anything of that
sort. I particularly hate the sound of people screaming, whether it's a
scream of pain, anger or any other kind of scream. Just reassure me--you're
not violent, are you? '
'Yesterday in a restaurant I clouted a fellow across the snout,' the
poet confessed manfully.
'What for? ' asked the visitor disapprovingly.
'For no reason at all, I must admit,' replied Ivan, embarrassed.
'Disgraceful,' said the visitor reproachfully and added:

'And I don't care for that expression of yours--clouted him across the
snout. . . . People have faces, not snouts. So I suppose you mean you
punched him in the face. . . . No, you must give up doing that sort of
thing.'
After this reprimand the visitor enquired :
'What's your job? '
'I'm a poet,' admitted Ivan with slight unwillingness.
This annoyed the man.
'Just my bad luck! ' he exclaimed, but immediately regretted it,
apologised and asked : ' What's your name? '
'Bezdomny.'
'Oh . . .' said the man frowning.
'What, don't you like my poetry? ' asked Ivan with curiosity.
'No, I don't.'
'Have you read any of it? '
'I've never read any of your poetry! ' said the visitor tetchily.
'Then how can you say that? '
'Why shouldn't I? ' retorted the visitor. ' I've read plenty of other
poetry. I don't suppose by some miracle that yours is any better, but I'm
ready to take it on trust. Is your poetry good?'
'Stupendous! ' said Ivan boldly.
'Don't write any more! ' said the visitor imploringly.
'I promise not to! ' said Ivan solemnly.
As they sealed the vow with a handshake, soft footsteps and voices
could be heard from the corridor.
'Sshh! ' whispered the man. He bounded out on to the balcony and
closed the grille behind him.
Praskovya Fyodorovna looked in, asked Ivan how he felt and whether he
wanted to sleep in the dark or the light. Ivan asked her to leave the light
on and Praskovya Fyodorovna departed, wishing him good night. When all was
quiet again the visitor returned.
He told Ivan in a whisper that a new patient had been put into No.
119--a fat man with a purple face who kept muttering about dollars in the
ventilation shaft and swearing that the powers of darkness had taken over
their house on Sadovaya. ' He curses Pushkin for all he's worth and keeps
shouting " Encore, encore! " ' said the visitor, twitching nervously. When
he had grown a little calmer he sat down and said : ' However, let's forget
about him,' and resumed his interrupted conversation with Ivan : ' How did
you come to be here? '
'Because of Pontius Pilate,' replied Ivan, staring glumly at the
floor.
'What?! ' cried the visitor, forgetting his caution, then clapped his
hand over his mouth. ' What an extraordinary coincidence! Do tell me about
it, I beg of you! '
For some reason Ivan felt that he could trust this stranger. Shyly at
first, then gaining confidence, he began to describe the previous day's
events at Patriarch's Ponds. His visitor treated Ivan as completely sane,
showed the greatest interest in the story and as it developed he reached a
state of near ecstasy. Now and again he interrupted Ivan, exclaiming :
'Yes, yes! Please go on! For heaven's sake don't leave anything out!
'Ivan left out nothing, as it made the story easier to tell and gradually he
approached the moment when Pontius Pilate, in his white cloak lined with
blood-red, mounted the platform.
Then the visitor folded his hands as though in prayer and whispered to
himself:
'Oh, I guessed it! I guessed it all! '
Listening to the terrible description of Berlioz's death, the visitor
made an enigmatic comment, his eyes flashing with malice :
'I'm only sorry that it wasn't Latunsky the critic or that hack
Mstislav Lavrovich instead of Berlioz! ' And he mouthed silently and
ecstatically : ' Go on! '
The visitor was highly amused by the story of how the cat had paid the
conductress and he was choking with suppressed laughter as Ivan, stimulated
by the success of his story-telling, hopped about on his haunches, imitating

the cat stroking his whiskers with a ten-kopeck piece.
'And so,' said Ivan, saddening as he described the scene at
Griboyedov, ' here I am.'
The visitor laid a sympathetic hand on the wretched poet's shoulder and
said:
'Unhappy poet! But it's your own fault, my dear fellow. You shouldn't
have treated him so carelessly and rudely. Now you're paying for it. You
should be thankful that you got off comparatively lightly.'
'But who on earth is he? ' asked Ivan, clenching his fists in
excitement.
The visitor stared at Ivan and answered with a question :
'You won't get violent, will you? We're all unstable people here . . .
There won't be any calls for the doctor, injections or any disturbances of
that sort, will there? '
'No, no! ' exclaimed Ivan. ' Tell me, who is he? '
'Very well,' replied the visitor, and said slowly and gravely :
'At Patriarch's Ponds yesterday you met Satan.'
As he had promised, Ivan did not become violent, but he was powerfully
shaken.
'It can't be! He doesn't exist!'
'Come, come! Surely you of all people can't say that. You were
apparently one of the first to suffer from him. Here you are, shut up in a
psychiatric clinic, and you still say he doesn't exist. How strange! '
Ivan was reduced to speechlessness.
'As soon as you started to describe him,' the visitor went on, ' I
guessed who it was that you were talking to yesterday. I must say I'm
surprised at Berlioz! You, of course, are an innocent,' again the visitor
apologised for his expression, ' but he, from what I've heard of him, was at
least fairly well read. The first remarks that this professor made to you
dispelled all my doubts. He's unmistakeable, my friend! You are ... do
forgive me again, but unless I'm wrong, you are an ignorant person, aren't
you? '
'I am indeed,' agreed the new Ivan.
'Well, you see, even the face you described, the different-coloured
eyes, the eyebrows . . . Forgive me, but have you even seen the opera Faust?
'
Ivan mumbled an embarrassed excuse.
'There you are, it's not surprising! But, as I said before, I'm
surprised at Berlioz. He's not only well read but extremely cunning.
Although in his defence I must say that Woland is quite capable of throwing
dust in the eyes of men who are even cleverer than Berlioz.'
'What? ' shouted Ivan.
‘ Quiet!'
With a sweeping gesture Ivan smacked his forehead with his palm and
croaked:
'I see it now. There was a letter " W " on his visiting card. Well I'm
damned! ' He sat for a while in perplexity, staring at the moon floating
past the grille and then said: ' So he really might have known Pontius
Pilate? He was alive then, I suppose? And they call me mad! ' he added,
pointing indignantly towards the door.
The visitor's mouth set in a fold of bitterness.
'We must look the facts in the face.' The visitor turned his face
towards the moon as it raced through a cloud. ' Both you and I are mad,
there's no point in denying it. He gave you a shock and it sent you mad,
because you were temperamentally liable to react in that way. Nevertheless
what you have described unquestionably happened in fact. But it is so
unusual that even Stravinsky, a psychiatrist of genius, naturally didn't
believe you. Has he examined you? (Ivan nodded.) The man you were talking to
was with Pontius Pilate, he did have breakfast with Kant and now he has paid
a call on Moscow.' ' But God knows what he may do here! Shouldn't we try and
catch him somehow! ' The old Ivan raised his head, uncertain but not yet
quite extinguished.
'You've already tried and look where it's got you,' said the visitor
ironically. ' I don't advise others to try. But he will cause more trouble,

you may be sure of that. How infuriating, though, that you met him and not
I. Although I'm a burnt-out man and the embers have died away to ash, I
swear that I would have given up Praskovya Fyodorovna's bunch of keys in
exchange for that meeting. Those keys are all I have. I am destitute.' ' Why
do you want to see him so badly? ' After a long, gloomy silence the visitor
said at last:
'You see, it's most extraordinary, but I am in here for exactly the
same reason that you are, I mean because of Pontius Pilate.' The visitor
glanced uneasily round and said : ' The fact is that a year ago I wrote a
novel about Pilate.'
'Are you a writer? ' asked the poet with interest. The visitor
frowned, threatened Ivan with his fist and said:
'I am a master.' His expression hardened and he pulled out of his
dressing gown pocket a greasy black cap with the letter ' M ' embroidered on
it in yellow silk. He put the cap on and showed himself to Ivan in profile
and full face to prove that he was a master. ' She sewed it for me with her
own hands,' he added mysteriously. ' What is your name? '
'I no longer have a name,' replied the curious visitor with grim
contempt. ' I have renounced it, as I have renounced life itself. Let us
forget it.'
'At least tell me about your novel,' asked Ivan tactfully. ' If you
wish. I should say that my life has been a somewhat unusual one,' began the
visitor.
A historian by training, two years ago he had, it seemed, been employed
in one of the Moscow museums. He was also a translator.
'From which language? ' asked Ivan.
'I know five languages beside my own,' replied the visitor. ' English,
French, German, Latin and Greek. And I read Italian a little.'
'Phew! ' Ivan whistled with envy.
This historian lived alone, had no relatives and knew almost no one in
Moscow. One day he won a hundred thousand roubles.
'Imagine my astonishment,' whispered the visitor in his black cap, '
when I fished my lottery ticket out of the laundry basket and saw that it
had the same number as the winning draw printed in the paper! The museum,'
he explained, ' had given me the ticket.'
Having won his hundred thousand, Ivan's mysterious guest bought some
books, gave up his room on Myasnitskaya Street...
'Ugh, it was a filthy hole! ' he snarled.
. . . and rented two rooms in the basement of a small house with a
garden near the Arbat. He gave up his job in the museum and began writing
his novel about Pontius Pilate.
'Ah, that was a golden age! ' whispered the narrator, his eyes
shining. ' A completely self-contained little flat and a hall with a sink
and running water,' he emphasised proudly, ' little windows just above the
level of the path leading from the garden gate. Only a few steps away, by
the garden fence, was a lilac, a lime tree and a maple. Ah, me! In winter I
rarely saw anyone walking up the garden path or heard the crunch of snow.
And there was always a blaze in my little stove! But suddenly it was spring
and through the muddied panes of my windows I saw first the bare branches
then the green of the first leaves. And then, last spring, something
happened which was far more delightful than winning a hundred thousand
roubles. And that, you must agree, is an enormous sum of money! '
'It is,' Ivan agreed, listening intently.
'I had opened the windows and was sitting in the second room, which
was quite tiny.' The visitor made measuring gestures. ' Like this--the divan
here, another divan along the other wall, a beautiful lamp on a little table
between them, a bookcase by the window and over here a little bureau. The
main room was huge--fourteen square metres!--books, more books and a stove.
It was a marvellous little place. How deliciously the lilac used to smell! I
was growing light-headed with fatigue and Pilate was coming to an end . . .'
'White cloak, red lining! How I know the feeling! ' exclaimed Ivan.
'Precisely! Pilate was rushing to a conclusion and I already knew what
the last words of the novel would be--" the fifth Procurator of Judaea, the
knight Pontius Pilate ". Naturally I used to go out for walks. A hundred

thousand is a huge sum and I had a handsome suit. Or I would go out for
lunch to a restaurant. There used to be a wonderful restaurant in the Arbat,
I don't know whether it's still there.'
Here his eyes opened wide and as he whispered he gazed at the moon.
'She was carrying some of those repulsive yellow flowers. God knows
what they're called, but they are somehow always the first to come out in
spring. They stood out very sharply against her black dress. She was
carrying yellow flowers! It's an ugly colour. She turned off Tverskaya into
a side-street and turned round. You know the Tverskaya, don't you? There
must have been a thousand people on it but I swear to you that she saw no
one but me. She had a look of suffering and I was struck less by her beauty
than by the extraordinary loneliness in her eyes. Obeying that yellow signal
I too turned into the side-street and followed her. We walked in silence
down that dreary, winding little street without saying a word, she on one
side, I on the other. There was not another soul in the street. I was in
agony because I felt I had to speak to her and was worried that I might not
be able to utter a word, she would disappear and I should never see her
again. Then, if you can believe it, she said :
" Do you like my flowers? "
'I remember exactly how her voice sounded. It was pitched fairly low
but with a catch in it and stupid as it may sound I had the impression that
it echoed across the street and reverberated from the dirty yellow wall. I
quickly crossed to her side and going up to her replied : " No ' She looked
at me in surprise and suddenly, completely unexpectedly, I realised that I
had been in love with this woman all my life. Extraordinary, isn't it?
You'll say I was mad, I expect.'
'I say nothing of the sort,' exclaimed Ivan, adding : ' Please, please
go on.'
The visitor continued:
'Yes, she looked at me in surprise and then she said : " Don't you
like flowers at all? "
'There was, I felt, hostility in her voice. I walked on alongside her,
trying to walk in step with her and to my amazement I felt completely free
of shyness.
'" No, I like flowers, only not these," I said.
'" Which flowers do you like? "
'" I love roses."
'I immediately regretted having said it, because she smiled guiltily
and threw her flowers into the gutter. Slightly embarrassed, I picked them
up and gave them to her but she pushed them away with a smile and I had to
carry them.
'We walked on in silence for a while until she pulled the flowers out
of my hand and threw them in the roadway, then slipped her black-gloved hand
into mine and we went on.'
'Go on,' said Ivan, ' and please don't leave anything out! '
'Well,' said the visitor, ' you can guess what happened after that.'
He wiped away a sudden tear with his right sleeve and went on. ' Love leaped
up out at us like a murderer jumping out of a dark alley. It shocked us
both--the shock of a stroke of lightning, the shock of a flick-knife. Later
she said that this wasn't so, that we had of course been in love for years
without knowing each other and never meeting, that she had merely been
living with another man and I had been living with . . . that girl, what was
her name . . .? '
'With whom? ' asked Bezdomny.
'With . . . er, that girl . . . she was called . . .' said the
visitor, snapping his fingers in a vain effort to remember.
'Were you married to her? ' ' Yes, of course I was, that's why it's so
embarrassing to forget ... I think it was Varya ... or was it Manya? . . .
no, Varya, that's it ... she wore a striped dress, worked at the museum. . .
. No good, can't remember. So, she used to say, she had gone out that
morning carrying those yellow flowers for me to find her at last and that if
it hadn't happened she would have committed suicide because her life was
empty.
'Yes, the shock of love struck us both at once. I knew it within the

hour when we found ourselves, quite unawares, on the embankment below the
Kremlin wall. We talked as though we had only parted the day before, as
though we had known each other for years. We agreed to meet the next day at
the same place by the Moscow River and we did. The May sun shone on us and
soon that woman became my mistress.
'She came to me every day at noon. I began waiting for her from early
morning. The strain of waiting gave me hallucinations of seeing things on
the table. After ten minutes I would sit at my little window and start to
listen for the creak of that ancient garden gate. It was curious : until I
met her no one ever came into our little yard. Now it seemed to me that the
whole town was crowding in. The gate would creak, my heart would bound and
outside the window a pair of muddy boots would appear level with my head. A
knife-grinder. Who in our house could possibly need a knife-grinder? What
was there for him to sharpen? Whose knives?
'She only came through that gate once a day, but my heart would beat
faster from at least ten false alarms every morning. Then when her time came
and the hands were pointing to noon, my heart went on thumping until her
shoes with their black patent-leather straps and steel buckles drew level,
almost soundlessly, with my basement window.
'Sometimes for fun she would stop at the second window and tap the
pane with her foot. In a second I would appear at that window but always her
shoe and her black silk dress that blocked the light had vanished and I
would turn instead to the hall to let her in.
'Nobody knew about our liaison, I can swear to that, although as a
rule no one can keep such affairs a complete secret. Her husband didn't
know, our friends didn't know. The other tenants in that forgotten old house
knew, of course, because they could see that a woman called on me every day,
but they never knew her name.'
'Who was she?' asked Ivan, deeply fascinated by this love story.
The visitor made a sign which meant that he would never reveal this to
anyone and went on with his narrative.
The master and his unknown mistress loved one another so strongly that
they became utterly inseparable. Ivan could clearly see for himself the two
basement rooms, where it was always twilight from the shade of the lilac
bush and the fence : the shabby red furniture, the bureau, the clock on top
of it which struck the half-hours and books, books from the painted floor to
the smoke-blackened ceiling, and the stove.
Ivan learned that from the very first days of their affair the man and
his mistress decided that fate had brought them together on the corner of
the Tverskaya and that side-street and that they were made for each other to
eternity.
Ivan heard his visitor describe how the lovers spent their day. Her
first action on arrival was to put on an apron and light an oil stove on a
wooden table in the cramped hall, with its tap and sink that the wretched
patient had recalled with such pride. There she cooked lunch and served it
on an oval table in the living-room. When the May storms blew and the water
slashed noisily past the dim little windows, threatening to flood their
home, the lovers stoked up the stove and baked potatoes in it. Steam poured
out of the potatoes as they cut them open, the charred skins blackened their
fingers. There was laughter in the basement, after the rain the trees in the
garden scattered broken branches and white blossom.
When the storms were past and the heat of summer came, the vase was
filled with the long-awaited roses that they both loved so much. The man who
called himself the master worked feverishly at his novel and the book cast
its spell over the unknown woman.
'At times I actually felt jealous of it,' the moonlight visitor
whispered to Ivan.
Running her sharp, pointed fingernails through her hair, she
ceaselessly read and re-read the manuscript, sewing that same black cap as
she did so. Sometimes she would squat down by the lower bookshelves or stand
by the topmost ones and wipe the hundreds of dusty spines. Sensing fame, she
drove him on and started to call him ' the master '. She waited impatiently
for the promised final words about the fifth Procurator of Judaea, reading
out in a loud sing-song random sentences that pleased her and saying that

the novel was her life.
It was finished in August and handed to a typist who transcribed it in
five copies. At last came the moment to leave the secret refuge and enter
the outside world.
'When I emerged into the world clutching my novel, my life came to an
end,' whispered the master. He hung his head and for a long while wagged the
black cap with its embroidered yellow ' M '. He went on with his story but
it grew more disjointed and Ivan could only gather that his visitor had
suffered some disaster.
'It was my first sortie into the literary world, but now that it's all
over and I am ruined for everyone to see, it fills me with horror to think
of it! ' whispered the master solemnly, raising his hand. ' God, what a
shock he gave me! '
'Who? ' murmured Ivan, scarcely audibly, afraid to disturb the
master's inspiration.
'The editor, of course, the editor! Oh yes, he read it. He looked at
me as if I had a swollen face, avoided my eyes and even giggled with
embarrassment. He had smudged and creased the typescript quite
unnecessarily. He asked me questions which I thought were insane. He said
nothing about the substance of the novel but asked me who I was and where I
came from, had I been writing for long, why had nothing been heard of me
before and finally asked what struck me as the most idiotic question of
all--who had given me the idea of writing a novel on such a curious subject?
Eventually I lost patience with him and asked him straight out whether he
was going to print my novel or not. This embarrassed him. He began mumbling
something, then announced that he personally was not competent to decide and
that the other members of the editorial board would have to study the book,
in particular the critics Latunsky and Ariman and the author Mstislav
Lavrovich. He asked me to come back a fortnight later. I did so and was
received by a girl who had developed a permanent squint from having to tell
so many lies.'
'That's Lapshennikova, the editor's secretary,' said Ivan with a
smile, knowing the world that his visitor was describing with such rancour.
'Maybe,' he cut in. ' Anyway, she gave me back my novel thoroughly
tattered and covered in grease-marks. Trying not to look at me, the girl
informed me that the editors had enough material for two years ahead and
therefore the question of printing my novel became, as she put it, "
redundant". What ^Ise do I remember?' murmured the visitor, wiping his
forehead. ' Oh yes, the red blobs spattered all over the title page and the
eyes of my mistress. Yes, I remember those eyes.'
The story grew more and more confused, full of more and more disjointed
remarks that trailed off unfinished. He said something about slanting rain
and despair in their basement home, about going somewhere else. He whispered
urgently that he would never, never blame her, the woman who had urged him
on into the struggle.
After that, as far as Ivan could tell, something strange and sudden
happened. One day he opened a newspaper and saw an article by Ariman,
entitled ' The Enemy Makes a Sortie,' where the critic warned all and sundry
that he, that is to say our hero had tried to drag into print an apologia
for Jesus Christ.
'I remember that! ' cried Ivan. ' But I've forgotten what your name
was.' ' I repeat, let's leave my name out of it, it no longer exists,'
replied the visitor. ' It's not important. A day or two later another
article appeared in a different paper signed by Mstislav Lavrovich, in which
the writer suggested striking and striking hard at all this pilatism and
religiosity which I was trying to drag (that damned word again!) into print.
Stunned by that unheard-of word " pilatism " I opened the third newspaper.
In it were two articles, one by Latunsky, the other signed with the initials
" N.E." Believe me, Ariman's and Lavrovich's stuff was a mere joke by
comparison with Latunsky's article. Suffice it to say that it was entitled "
A Militant Old Believer ". I was so absorbed in reading the article about
myself that I did not notice her standing in front of me with a wet umbrella
and a sodden copy of the same newspaper. Her eyes were flashing fire, her
hands cold and trembling. First she rushed to kiss me then she said in a

strangled voice, thumping the table, that she was going to murder Latunsky.'
Embarrassed, Ivan gave a groan but said nothing. ' The joyless autumn
days came,' the visitor went on, ' the appalling failure of my novel seemed
to have withered part of my soul. In fact I no longer had anything to do and
I only lived for my meetings with her. Then something began to happen to me.
God knows what it was; I expect Stravinsky has unravelled it long ago. I
began to suffer from depression and strange forebodings. The articles,
incidentally, did not stop. At first I simply laughed at them, then came the
second stage : amazement. In literally every line of those articles one
could detect a sense of falsity, of unease, in spite of their confident and
threatening tone. I couldn't help feeling--and the conviction grew stronger
the more I read--that the people writing those articles were not saying what
they had really wanted to say and that this was the cause of their fury. And
then came the third stage--fear. Don't misunderstand me, I was not afraid of
the articles ; I was afraid of something else which had nothing to do with
them or with my novel. I started, for instance, to be afraid of the dark. I
was reaching the stage of mental derangement. I felt, especially just before
going to sleep, that some very cold, supple octopus was fastening its
tentacles round my heart. I had to sleep with the light on.
'My beloved had changed too. I told her nothing about the octopus, of
course, but she saw that something was wrong with me. She lost weight, grew
paler, stopped laughing and kept begging me to have that excerpt from the
novel printed. She said I should forget everything and go south to the Black
Sea, paying for the journey with what was left of the hundred thousand
roubles.
'She was very insistent, so to avoid arguing with her (something told
me that I never would go to the Black Sea) I promised to arrange the trip
soon. However, she announced that she would buy me the ticket herself. I
took out all my money, which was about ten thousand roubles, and gave it to
her.
'" Why so much? " she said in surprise.
'I said something about being afraid of burglars and asked her to keep
the money until my departure. She took it, put it in her handbag, began to
kiss me and said that she would rather die than leave me alone in this
condition, but people were expecting her, she had to go but would come back
the next day. She begged me not to be afraid.
'It was twilight, in mid-October. She went. I lay down on my divan and
fell asleep without putting on the light. I was awakened by the feeling that
the octopus was there. Fumbling in the dark I just managed to switch on the
lamp. My watch showed two o'clock in the morning. When I had gone to bed I
had been sickening; when I woke up I was an ill man. I had a sudden feeling
that the autumn murk was about to burst the window-panes, run into the room
and I would drown in it as if it were ink. I had lost control of myself. I
screamed, I wanted to run somewhere, if only to my landlord upstairs.
Wrestling with myself as one struggles with a lunatic, I had just enough
strength to crawl to the stove and re-light it. When I heard it begin to
crackle and the fire-door started rattling in the draught, I felt slightly
better. I rushed into the hall, switched on the light, found a bottle of
white wine and began gulping it down from the bottle. This calmed my fright
a little, at least enough to stop me from running to my landlord. Instead, I
went back to the stove. I opened the fire-door. The heat began to warm my
hands and face and I whispered :
'" Something terrible has happened to me . . . Come, come, please come
. . .! "
'But nobody came. The fire roared in the stove, rain whipped against
the windows. Then I took the heavy typescript copies of the novel and my
handwritten drafts out of the desk drawer and started to burn them. It was
terribly hard to do because paper that has been written over in ink doesn't
burn easily. Breaking my fingernails I tore up the manuscript books, stuffed
them down between the logs and stoked the burning pages with the poker.
Occasionally there was so much ash that it put the flames out, but I
struggled with it until finally the whole novel, resisting fiercely to the
end, was destroyed. Familiar words flickered before me, the yellow crept
inexorably up the pages yet I could still read the words through it. They

only vanished when the paper turned black and I had given it a savage
beating with the poker.
'There was a sound of someone scratching gently at the window. My
heart leaped and thrusting the last manuscript book into the fire I rushed
up the brick steps from the basement to the door that opened on to the yard.
Panting, I reached the door and asked softly:
'" Who's there? "
'And a voice, her voice, answered :
'" It's me . . ."
'I don't remember how I managed the chain and the key. As soon as she
was indoors she fell into my arms, all wet, cheek wet, hair bedraggled,
shivering. I could only say :
'" Is it really you? . . ." then my voice broke off and we ran
downstairs into the flat.
'She took off her coat in the hall and we went straight into the
living-room. Gasping, she pulled the last bundle of paper out of the stove
with her bare hands. The room at once filled with smoke. I stamped out the
flames with my foot and she collapsed on the divan and burst into
convulsive, uncontrollable tears.
'When she was calm again I said :
'" I suddenly felt I hated the novel and I was afraid. I'm sick. I
feel terrible."
'She sat up and said :
'" God how ill you look. Why, why? But I'm going to save you. What's
the matter? "
'I could see her eyes swollen from smoke and weeping, felt her cool
hands smoothing my brow.
'" I shall make you better," she murmured, burying her head in my
shoulder. " You're going to write it again. Why, oh why didn't I keep one
copy myself? "
'She ground her teeth with fury and said something indistinct. Then
with clamped lips she started to collect and sort the burnt sheets of paper.
It was a chapter from somewhere in the middle of the book, I forget which.
She carefully piled up the sheets, wrapped them up into a parcel and tied it
with string. All her movements showed that she was a determined woman who
was in absolute command of herself. She asked for a glass of wine and having
drunk it said calmly :
'" This is how one pays for lying," she said, " and I don't want to go
on lying any more. I would have stayed with you this evening, but I didn't
want to do it like that. I don't want his last memory of me to be that I ran
out on him in the middle of the night. He has never done me any harm ... He
was suddenly called out, there's a fire at his factory. But he'll be back
soon. I'll tell him tomorrow morning, tell him I love someone else and then
come back to you for ever. If you don't want me to do that, tell me."
'" My poor, poor girl," I said to her. " I won't allow you to do it.
It will be hell living with me and I don't want you to perish here as I
shall perish."
'" Is that the only reason? " she asked, putting her eyes close to
mine. ' " That's the only reason."
'She grew terribly excited, hugged me, embraced my neck and said:
'" Then I shall die with you. I shall be here tomorrow morning."
'The last that I remember seeing of her was the patch of light from my
hall and in that patch of light a loose curl of her hair, her beret and her
determined eyes, her dark silhouette in the doorway and a parcel wrapped in
white paper.
'" I'd see you out, but I don't trust myself to come back alone, I'm
afraid."
'" Don't be afraid. Just wait a few hours. I'll be back tomorrow
morning."
'Those were the last words that I heard her say.
'Sshh! ' The patient suddenly interrupted himself and raised Ms
finger. ' It's a restless moonlit night.' He disappeared on to the balcony.
Ivan heard the sound of wheels along the corridor, there was a faint groan
or cry.

When all was quiet again, the visitor came back and reported that a
patient had been put into room No. 120, a man who kept asking for his head
back. Both men relapsed into anxious silence for a while, but soon resumed
their interrupted talk. The visitor had just opened his mouth but the night,
as he had said, was a restless one : voices were heard in the corridor and
the visitor began to whisper into Ivan's ear so softly that only the poet
could hear what he was saying, with the exception of the first sentence :
'A quarter of an hour after she had left me there came a knock at my
window . . .'
The man was obviously very excited by what he was whispering into
Ivan's ear. Now and again a spasm would cross his face. Fear and anger
sparkled in his eyes. The narrator pointed in the direction of the moon,
which had long ago disappeared from the balcony. Only when all the noises
outside had stopped did the visitor move away from Ivan and speak louder :
'Yes, so there I stood, out in my little yard, one night in the middle
of January, wearing the same overcoat but without any buttons now and I was
freezing with cold. Behind me the lilac bush was buried in snowdrifts, below
and in front of me were my feebly lit windows with drawn blinds. I knelt
down to the first of them and listened--a gramophone was playing in my room.
I could hear it but see nothing. After a slight pause I went out of the gate
and into the street. A snowstorm was howling along it. A dog which ran
between my legs frightened me, and to get away from it I crossed to the
other side. Cold and fear, which had become my inseparable companions, had
driven me to desperation. I had nowhere to go and the simplest thing would
have been to throw myself under a tram then and there where my side street
joined the main road. In the distance I could see the approaching tramcars,
looking like ice-encrusted lighted boxes, and hear the fearful scrunch of
their wheels along the frostbound tracks. But the joke, my dear friend, was
that every cell of my body was in the grip of fear. I was as afraid of the
tram as I had been of the dog. I'm the most hopeless case in this building,
I assure you! '
'But you could have let her know, couldn't you?' said Ivan
sympatherically. ' Besides, she had all your money. I suppose she kept it,
did she? '
'Don't worry, of course she kept it. But you obviously don't
understand me. Or rather I have lost the powers of description that I once
had. I don't feel very sorry for her, as she is of no more use to me. Why
should I write to her? She would be faced,' said the visitor gazing
pensively at the night sky, ' by a letter from the madhouse. Can one really
write to anyone from an address like this? ... I--a mental patient? How
could I make her so unhappy? I ... I couldn't do it.'
Ivan could only agree. The poet's silence was eloquent of his sympathy
and compassion for his visitor, who bowed his head in pain at his memories
and said :
'Poor woman ... I can only hope she has forgotten me . . .'
'But you may recover,' said Ivan timidly.
'I am incurable,' said the visitor calmly. ' Even though Stravinsky
says that he will send me back to normal life, I don't believe him. He's a
humane man and he only wants to comfort me. I won't deny, though, that I'm a
great deal better now than I was. Now, where was I? Oh yes. The frost, the
moving tram-cars ... I knew that this clinic had just been opened and I
crossed the whole town on foot to come here. It was madness! I would
probably have frozen to death but for a lucky chance. A lorry had broken
down on the road and I approached the driver. It was four kilometres past
the city limits and to my surprise he took pity on me. He was driving here
and he took me ... The toes of my left foot were frost-bitten, but they
cured them. I've been here four months now. And do you know, I think this is
not at all a bad place. I shouldn't bother to make any great plans for the
future if I were you. I, for example, wanted to travel all over the world.
Well, it seems that I was not fated to have my wish. I shall only see an
insignificant little corner of the globe. I don't think it's necessarily the
best bit, but I repeat, it's not so bad. Summer's on the way and the balcony
will be covered in ivy, so Praskovya Fyodorovna tells me. These keys have
enlarged my radius of action. There'll be a moon at night. Oh, it has set!

It's freshening. Midnight is on the way. It's time for me to go.'
'Tell me, what happened afterwards with Yeshua and Pilate? ' begged
Ivan. ' Please, I want to know.'
'Oh no, I couldn't,' replied the visitor, wincing painfully. ' I can't
think about my novel without shuddering. Your friend from Patriarch's Ponds
could have done it better than I can. Thanks for the talk. Goodbye.'
Before Ivan had time to notice it, the grille had shut with a gentle
click and the visitor was gone.

14. Saved by Cock-Crow

His nerves in shreds, Rimsky did not stay for the completion of the
police report on the incident but took refuge in his own office. He sat down
at the desk and with bloodshot eyes stared at the magic rouble notes spread
out in front of him. The treasurer felt his reason slipping. A steady
rumbling could be heard from outside as the public streamed out of the
theatre on to the street. Suddenly Rimsky's acute hearing distinctly caught
the screech of a police whistle, always a sound of ill-omen. When it was
repeated and answered by another, more prolonged and authoritative, followed
by a clearly audible bellow of laughter and a kind of ululating noise, the
treasurer realised at once that something scandalous was happening in the
street. However much he might like to disown it, the noise was bound to be
closely connected with the terrible act put on that evening by the black
magician and his assistants.
The treasurer was right. As he glanced out of the window on to Sadovaya
Street he gave a grimace and hissed :
'I knew it! '
In the bright light of the street lamps he saw below him on the
pavement a woman wearing nothing but a pair of violet knickers, a hat and an
umbrella. Round the painfully embarrassed woman, trying desperately to
crouch down and run away, surged the crowd laughing in the way that had sent
shivers down Rimsky's spine. Beside the woman was a man who was ripping off
his coat and getting his arm hopelessly tangled in the sleeve.
Shouts and roars of laughter were also coming from the side entrance,
and as he turned in that direction Grigory Danilovich saw another woman,
this time in pink underwear. She was struggling across the pavement in an
attempt to hide in the doorway, but the people coming out barred her way and
the wretched victim of her own rashness and vanity, cheated by the sinister
Faggot, could do nothing but hope to be swallowed up by the ground. A
policeman ran towards the unfortunate woman, splitting the air with his
whistle. He was closely followed by some cheerful, cloth-capped young men,
the source of the ribald laughter and wolf-whistles.
A thin, moustached horse-cab driver drove up alongside the first
undressed woman and smiling all over his whiskered face, reined in his horse
with a flourish.
Rimsky punched himself on the head, spat with fury and jumped back from
the window. He sat at his desk for a while listening to the noise in the
street. The sound of whistles from various directions rose to a climax and
then began to fade out. To Rimsky's astonishment the uproar subsided
unexpectedly soon.
The time had come to act, to drink the bitter cup of responsibility.
The telephones had been repaired during the last act and he now had to ring
up, report the incident, ask for help, blame it all on Likhodeyev and
exculpate himself.
Twice Rimsky nervously picked up the receiver and twice put it down.
Suddenly the deathly silence of the office was broken by the telephone
itself ringing. He jumped and went cold. ' My nerves are in a terrible
state,' he thought as he lifted the telephone. Immediately he staggered back
and turned whiter than paper. A soft, sensual woman's voice whispered into

the earpiece :
'Don't ring up, Rimsky, or you'll regret it . . .'
The line went dead. Feeling gooseflesh spreading over his skin, the
treasurer replaced the receiver and glanced round to the window behind his
back. Through the sparse leaves of a sycamore tree he saw the moon flying
through a translucent cloud. He seemed to be mesmerised by the branches of
the tree and the longer Rimsky stared at them the more strongly he felt the
grip of fear.
Pulling himself together the treasurer finally turned away from the
moonlit window and stood up. There was now no longer any question of
telephoning and Rimsky could only think of one thing--how to get out of the
theatre as quickly as possible.
He listened : the building was silent. He realised that for some time
now he had been the only person left on the second floor and a childish,
uncontrollable fear overcame him at the thought. He shuddered to think that
he would have to walk alone through the empty passages and down the
staircase. He feverishly grabbed the magic roubles from his desk, stuffed
them into his briefcase and coughed to summon up a little courage. His cough
sounded hoarse and weak.
At this moment he noticed what seemed to be a damp, evil-smelling
substance oozing under the door and into his office. A tremor ran down the
treasurer's spine. Suddenly a clock began to strike midnight and even this
made him shudder. But his heart sank completely when he heard the sound of a
latch-key being softly turned in the lock. Clutching his briefcase with
damp, cold hands Rimsky felt that if that scraping noise in the keyhole were
to last much longer his nerves would snap and he would scream.
At last the door gave way and Varenukha slipped noiselessly into the
office. Rimsky collapsed into an armchair. Gasping for air, he smiled what
was meant to be an ingratiating smile and whispered :
'God, what a fright you gave me. . . .'
Terrifying as this sudden appearance was, it had its hopeful side--it
cleared up at least one little mystery in this whole baffling affair.
'Tell me, tell me, quickly! . . .' croaked Rimsky, clutching at his
one straw of certainty in a world gone mad. ' What does this all mean? "
'I'm sorry,' mumbled Varenukha, closing the door. ' I thought you
would have left by now.' Without taking his cap off he crossed to an
armchair and sat down beside the desk, facing Rimsky. There was a trace of
something odd in Varenukha's reply, immediately detected by Rimsky, whose
sensitivity was now on a par with the world's most delicate seismograph. For
one thing, why had Varenukha come to the treasurer's office if he thought he
wasn't there? He had his own office, after all. For another, no matter which
entrance Varenukha might have used to come into the theatre he must have met
one of the night watchmen, who had all been told that Grigory Danilovich was
working late in his office. Rimsky, however, did not dwell long on these
peculiarities--this was not the moment.
'Why didn't you ring me? And what the hell was all that pantomime
about Yalta? '
'It was what I thought,' replied the house manager, making a sucking
noise as though troubled by an aching tooth. ' They found him in a bar out
at Pushkino.'
'Pushkino? But that's just outside Moscow! What about those telegrams
from Yalta? '
'Yalta--hell! He got the Pushkino telegraphist drunk and they started
playing the fool, which included sending us those telegrams marked " Yalta
".'
'Aha, aha ... I see now . . .' crooned Rimsky, his yellowish eyes
flashing. In his mind's eye he saw Stepa being solemnly dismissed from his
job. Freedom! At last Rimsky would be rid of that idiot Likhodeyev! Perhaps
something even worse than the sack was in store for Stepan Bogdanovich . . .
' Tell me all the details! ' cried Rimsky, banging his desk with a
paper-weight.
Varenukha began telling the story. As soon as he had arrived at the
place where the treasurer had sent him, he was immediately shown in and
listened to with great attention. No one, of course, believed for a moment

that Stepa was in Yalta. Everybody at once agreed with Varenukha's
suggestion that Likhodeyev was obviously at the ' Yalta ' restaurant in
Pushkino. ' Where is he now? ' Rimsky interrupted excitedly. ' Where do you
think? ' replied the house manager with a twisted smile. ' In the police
cells, of course, being sobered up! '
'Ah! Thank God for that! '
Varenukha went on with his story and the more he said the clearer
Rimsky saw the long chain of Likhodeyev's misdeeds, each succeeding link in
it worse than the last. What a price he was going to pay for one drunken
afternoon at Pushkino! Dancing with the telegraphist. Chasing terrified
women. Picking a fight with the barman at the ' Yalta'. Throwing onions on
to the floor. Breaking eight bottles of white wine. Smashing a cab-driver's
taximeter for refusing to take him. Threatening to arrest people who tried
to stop him. . . .
Stepa was well known in the Moscow theatre world and everybody knew
that the man was a menace, but this story was just a shade too much, even
for Stepa. . . . Rimsky's sharp eyes bored into Varenukha's face across the
desk and the longer the story went on the grimmer those eyes became. The
more Varenukha embroidered his account with picturesque and revolting
details, the less Rimsky believed him. When Varenukha described how Stepa
was so far gone that he tried to resist the men who had been sent to bring
him back to Moscow, Rimsky was quite certain that everything the house
manager was telling him was a lie--a lie from beginning to end.
Varenukha had never gone to Pushkino, and Stepa had never been there
either. There was no drunken telegraphist, no broken glass in the bar and
Stepa had not been hauled away with ropes-- none of it had ever happened.
As soon as Rimsky felt sure that his colleague was lying to him, a
feeling of terror crawled over his body, beginning with his feet and for the
second time he had the weird feeling that a kind of malarial damp was oozing
across the floor. The house manager was sitting in a curious hunched
attitude in the armchair, trying constantly to stay in the shadow of the
blue-shaded table lamp and ostensibly shading his eyes from the light with a
folded newspaper. Without taking his eyes off Varenukha for a moment,
Rimsky's mind was working furiously to unravel this new mystery. Why should
the man be lying to him at this late hour in the totally empty and silent
building? Slowly a consciousness of danger, of an unknown but terrible
danger took hold of Rimsky. Pretending not to notice Varenukha's fidgeting
and tricks with the newspaper, the treasurer concentrated on his face,
scarcely listening to what he was saying. There was something else that
Rimsky found even more sinister than this slanderous and completely bogus
yarn about the goings-on in Pushkino, and that something was a change in the
house manager's appearance and manner.
However hard Varenukha tried to pull down the peak of his cap to shade
his face and however much he waved the newspaper, Rimsky managed to discern
an enormous bruise that covered most of the right side of his face, starting
at his nose. What was more, this normally ruddy-cheeked man now had an
unhealthy chalky pallor and although the night was hot, he was wearing an
old-fashioned striped cravat tied round his neck. If one added to this his
newly acquired and repulsive habit of sucking his teeth, a distinct lowering
and coarsening of his tone of voice and the furtive, shifty look in his
eyes, it was safe to say that Ivan Savye-lich Varenukha was unrecognisable.
Something even more insistent was worrying Rimsky, but he could not put
his finger on it however much he racked his brain or stared at Varenukha. He
was only sure of one thing--that there was something peculiar and unnatural
in the man's posture in that familiar chair.
'Well, finally they overpowered him and shoved him into a car,' boomed
Varenukha, peeping from under the newspaper and covering his bruise with his
hand.
Rimsky suddenly stretched out his arm and with an apparently unthinking
gesture of his palm pressed the button of an electric bell, drumming his
fingers as he did so. His heart sank. A loud ringing should have been heard
instantly throughout the building --but nothing happened, and the bell-push
merely sank lifelessly into the desktop. The warning system was out of
order.

Rimsky's cunning move did not escape Varenukha, who scowled and said
with a clear flicker of hostility in his look :
'Why did you ring? '
'Oh, I just pressed it by mistake, without thinking,' mumbled Rimsky,
pulling back his hand and asked in a shaky voice :
'What's that on your face? '
'The car braked suddenly and I hit myself on the door-handle,' replied
Varenukha, averting his eyes.
'He's lying!' said Rimsky to himself. Suddenly his eyes gaped with
utter horror and he pressed himself against the back of his chair.
On the floor behind Varenukha's chair lay two intersecting shadows, one
thicker and blacker than the other. The shadows cast by the back of the
chair and its tapering legs were clearly visible, but above the shadow of
the chairback there was no shadow or' Varenukha's head, just as there was no
shadow of his feet to be seen under the chairlegs.
'He throws no shadow! ' cried Rimsky in a silent shriek of despair. He
shuddered helplessly.
Following Rimsky's horrified stare Varenukha glanced furtively round
behind the chairback and realised that he had been found out. He got up
(Rimsky did the same) and took a pace away from the desk, clutching his
briefcase.
'You've guessed, damn you! You always were clever,' said Varenukha
smiling evilly right into Rimsky's face. Then he suddenly leaped for the
door and quickly pushed down the latch-button on the lock. The treasurer
looked round in desperation, retreated towards the window that gave on to
the garden and in that moon-flooded window he saw the face of a naked girl
pressed to the glass, her bare arm reaching through the open top pane and
trying to open the lower casement.
It seemed to Rimsky that the light of the desk-lamp was going out and
that the desk itself was tilting. A wave of icy cold washed over him, but
luckily for him he fought it off and did not fall. The remnants of his
strength were only enough for him to whisper:
'Help . . .'
Varenukha, guarding the door, was jumping up and down beside it. He
hissed and sucked, signalling to the girl in the window and pointing his
crooked fingers towards Rimsky.
The girl increased her efforts, pushed her auburn head through the
little upper pane, stretched out her arm as far as she could and began to
pluck at the lower catch with her fingernails and shake the frame. Her arm,
coloured deathly green, started to stretch as if it were made of rubber.
Finally her green cadaverous fingers caught the knob of the window-catch,
turned it and the casement opened. Rimsky gave a weak cry, pressed himself
to the wall and held his briefcase in front of himself like a shield. His
last hour, he knew, had come.
The window swung wide open, but instead of the freshness of the night
and the scent of lime-blossom the room was flooded with the stench of the
grave. The walking corpse stepped on to the window-sill. Rimsky clearly saw
patches of decay on her breast.
At that moment the sudden, joyful sound of a cock crowing rang out in
the garden from the low building behind the shooting gallery where they kept
the cage birds used on the Variety stage. With his full-throated cry the
tame cock was announcing the approach of dawn over Moscow from the east.
Wild fury distorted the girl's face as she swore hoarsely and Varenukha
by the door whimpered and collapsed to the floor.
The cock crowed again, the girl gnashed her teeth and her auburn hair
stood on end. At the third crow she turned and flew out. Behind her, flying
horizontally through the air like an oversized cupid, Varenukha floated
slowly across the desk and out of the window.
As white as snow, without a black hair left on his head, the old man
who a short while before had been Rimsky ran to the door, freed the latch
and rushed down the dark corridor. At the top of the staircase, groaning
with terror he fumbled for the switch and lit the lights on the staircase.
The shattered, trembling old man fell down on the stairs, imagining that
Varenukha was gently bearing down on him from above.

At the bottom Rimsky saw die night-watchman, who had fallen asleep on a
chair in the foyer beside the box office. Rimsky tiptoed past him and
slipped out of the main door. Once in the street he felt slightly better. He
came to his senses enough to realise, as he clutched his head, that he had
left his hat in his office.
Nothing -would have induced him to go back for it and he ran panting
across the wide street to the cinema on the opposite corner, where a
solitary cab stood on the rank. In a minute he had reached it before anyone
else could snatch it from him.
'To the Leningrad Station--hurry and I'll make it worth your while/
said the old man, breathing heavily and clutching his heart.
'I'm only going to the garage,' replied the driver turning away with a
surly face.
Rimsky unfastened his briefcase, pulled out fifty roubles and thrust
them at the driver through the open window.
A few moments later the taxi, shaking like a leaf in a storm, was
flying along the ring boulevard. Bouncing up and down in his seat, Rimsky
caught occasional glimpses of the driver's delighted expression and his own
wild look in the mirror.
Jumping out of the car at the station, Rimsky shouted to the first man
he saw, who was wearing a white apron and a numbered metal disc :
'First class single--here's thirty roubles,' he said as he fumbled for
the money in his briefcase. ' If there aren't any seats left in the first
I'll take second ... if there aren't any in the second, get me " Hard "
class! '
Glancing round at the illuminated clock the man with the apron snatched
the money from Rimsky's hand.
Five minutes later the express pulled out of the glass-roofed station
and steamed into the dark. With it vanished Rimsky.

15. The Dream of Nikanor Ivanovich

It is not hard to guess that the fat man with the purple face who was
put into room No. 119 at the clinic was Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi.
He had not, however, been put into Professor Stravinsky's care at once,
but had first spent some time in another place, of which he could remember
little except a desk, a cupboard and a sofa.
There some men had questioned Nikanor Ivanovich, but since his eyes
were clouded by a flux of blood and extreme mental anguish, the interview
was muddled and inconclusive.
'Are you Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi,' they began, ' chairman of the house
committee of No. 302a, Sadovaya Street? '
Nikanor Ivanovich gave a wild peal of laughter and replied:
'Of course I'm Nikanor! But why call me chairman? '
'What do you mean? ' they asked, frowning.
'Well,' he replied,' if I'm a chairman I would have seen at once that
he was an evil spirit, wouldn't I? I should have realised, what with his
shaky pince-nez, his tattered clothes--how could he have been an
interpreter? '
'Who are you talking about? '
'Koroviev! ' cried Nikanor Ivanovich. ' The man who's moved into No.
50. Write it down--Koroviev! You must find him and arrest him at once.
Staircase 6--write it down--that's where you'll find him.'
'Where did you get the foreign currency from? ' they asked
insinuatingly.
'As almighty God's my witness,' said Nikanor Ivanovich, ' I never
touched any and I never even suspected that it was foreign money. God will
punish me for my sin,' Nikanor Ivanovich went on feelingly, unbuttoning his
shirt, buttoning it up again and crossing himself. ' I took the money--I
admit that--but it was Soviet money. I even signed a receipt for it. Our

secretary Prolezhnov is just as bad--frankly we're all thieves in our house
committee. . . . But I never took any foreign money.'
On being told to stop playing the fool and to tell them how the dollars
found their way into his ventilation shaft, Nikanor Ivanovich fell on his
knees and rocked backwards and forwards with his mouth wide open as though
he were trying to swallow the wooden parquet blocks.
'I'll do anything you like,' he groaned, ' that'll make you believe I
didn't take the stuff. That Koroviev's nothing less than a devil!'
Everyone's patience has its limit; voices were raised behind the desk
and Nikanor Ivanovich was told that it was time he stopped talking
gibberish.
Suddenly the room was filled with a savage roar from Nikanor Ivanovich
as he jumped up from his knees:
'There he is! There--behind the cupboard! There--look at him grinning!
And his pince-nez . . . Stop him! Arrest him! Surround the building! '
The blood drained from Nikanor Ivanovich's face. Trembling, he made the
sign of the cross in the air, fled for the door, then back again, intoned a
prayer and then relapsed into complete delirium.
It was plain that Nikanor Ivanovich was incapable of talking
rationally. He was removed and put in a room by himself, where he calmed
down slightly and only prayed and sobbed.
Men were sent to the house on Sadovaya Street and inspected flat No.
50, but they found no Koroviev and no one in the building who had seen him
or heard of him. The flat belonging to Berlioz and Likhodeyev was empty and
the wax seals, quite intact, hung on all the cupboards and drawers in the
study. The men left the building, taking with them the bewildered and
crushed Prolezhnev, secretary of the house committee.
That evening Nikanor Ivanovich was delivered to Stravinsky's clinic.
There he behaved so violently that he had to be given one of Stravinsky's
special injections and it was midnight before Nikanor Ivanovich tell asleep
in room No. 119, uttering an occasional deep, tormented groan.
But the longer he slept the calmer he grew. He stopped tossing and
moaning, his breathing grew light and even, until finally the doctors left
him alone.
Nikanor Ivanovich then had a dream, which was undoubtedly influenced by
his recent experiences. It began with some men carrying golden trumpets
leading him, with great solemnity, to a pair of huge painted doors, where
his companions blew a fanfare in Nikanor Ivanovich's honour. Then a bass
voice boomed at him from the sky :
'Welcome, Nikanor Ivanovich! Hand over your foreign currency! ' Amazed
beyond words, Nikanor Ivanovich saw in front of him a black loudspeaker.
Soon he found himself in an auditorium lit by crystal candelabra beneath a
gilded ceiling and by sconces on the walls. Everything resembled a small but
luxurious theatre. There was a stage, closed by a velvet curtain whose dark
cerise background was strewn with enlargements of gold ten-rouble pieces;
there was a prompter's box and even an audience.
Nikanor Ivanovich was surprised to notice that the audience was an
all-male one and that its members all wore beards. An odd feature of the
auditorium was that it had no seats and the entire assembly was sitting on
the beautifully polished and extremely slippery floor.
Embarrassed at finding himself in this large and unexpected company,
after some hesitation Nikanor Ivanovich followed the general example and sat
down Turkish-fashion on the parquet, wedging himself between a stout
redbeard and a pale and extremely hirsute citizen. None of the audience paid
any attention to the newcomer.
There came the gentle sound of a bell, the house-lights went out, the
curtains parted and revealed a lighted stage set with an armchair, a small
table on which was a little golden bell, and a heavy black velvet backdrop.
On to the stage came an actor, dinner-jacketed, clean-shaven, his hair
parted in the middle above a young, charming face. The audience grew lively
and everybody turned to look at the stage. The actor advanced to the
footlights and rubbed his hands.
'Are you sitting down? ' he enquired in a soft baritone and smiled at
the audience.

'We are, we are,' chorused the tenors and basses.
'H'mm . . .' said the actor thoughtfully, ' I realise, of course, how
bored you must be. Everybody else is out of doors now, enjoying the warm
spring sunshine, while you have to squat on the floor in this stuffy
auditorium. Is the programme really worth while? Ah well, chacun a son
gout,' said the actor philosophically.
At this he changed the tone of his voice and announced gaily :
'And the next number on our programme is--Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi,
tenants' committee chairman and manager of a diabetic restaurant. This way
please, Nikanor Ivanovich! '
At the sound of the friendly applause which greeted his name, Nikanor
Ivanovich's eyes bulged with astonishment and the compere, shading his eyes
against the glare of the footlights, located him among the audience and
beckoned him to the stage. Without knowing how, Nikanor Ivanovich found
himself on stage. His eyes were dazzled from above and below by the glare of
coloured lighting which blotted out the audience from his sight.
'Now Nikanor Ivanovich, set us an example,' said the young actor
gently and confidingly, ' and hand over your foreign currency.'
Silence. Nikanor Ivanovich took a deep breath and said in a low voice :
' I swear to God, I . . .'
Before he could finish, the whole audience had burst into shouts of
disapproval. Nikanor Ivanovich relapsed into uncomfortable silence. ' Am I
right,' said the compere, ' in thinking that you were about to swear by God
that you had no foreign currency?' He gave Nikanov Ivanovich a sympathetic
look.
'That's right. I haven't any.'
'I see,' said the actor. ' But ... if you'll forgive the indelicacy .
. . where did those four hundred dollars come from that were found in the
lavatory of your flat, of which you and your wife are the sole occupants? '
'They were magic ones! ' said a sarcastic voice somewhere in the dark
auditorium.
'That's right, they were magic ones,' said Nikanor Ivanovich timidly,
addressing no one in particular but adding : ' an evil spirit, that
interpreter in a check suit planted them on me.'
Again the audience roared in protest. When calm was restored, the actor
said:
'This is better than Lafontaine's fables! Planted four hundred
dollars! Listen, you're all in the currency racket--I ask you now, as
experts : is that possible? '
'We're not currency racketeers,' cried a number of offended voices
from the audience, ' but it's impossible! '
'I entirely agree,' said the actor firmly, ' and now I'd like to ask
you : what sort of things do people plant on other people? '
'Babies! ' cried someone at the back.
'Quite right,' agreed the compere. ' Babies, anonymous letters,
manifestos, time bombs and God knows what else, but no one would ever plant
four hundred dollars on a person because there just isn't anyone idiotic
enough to try.' Turning to Nikanor Ivanovich the artist added sadly and
reproachfully: ' You've disappointed me, Nikanor Ivanovich. I was relying on
you. Well, that number was a flop, I'm afraid.'
The audience began to boo Nikanor Ivanovich.
'He's in the currency black market all right,' came a shout from the
crowd, ' and innocent people like us have to suffer because of the likes of
him.'
'Don't shout at him,' said the compere gently. ' He'll repent.'
Turning his blue eyes, brimming with tears, towards Nikanor Ivanovich, he
said : ' Go back to your place Nikanor Ivanovich.'
After this the actor rang the bell and loudly announced:
'Interval! '
Shattered by his involuntary debut in the theatre, Nikanor Ivanovich
found himself back at his place on the floor. Then he began dreaming that
the auditorium was plunged into total darkness and fiery red words leaped
out from the walls ' Hand over all foreign cirrency! '
After a while the curtains opened again and the compere announced:

'Sergei Gerardovich Dunchill on stage, please! '
Dunchill was a good-looking though very stout man of about fifty.
'Sergei Gerardovich,' the compere addressed him, ' you have been
sitting here for six weeks now, firmly refusing to give up your remaining
foreign currency, at a time when your country has desperate need of it. You
are extremely obstinate. You're an intelligent man, you understand all this
perfectly well, yet you refuse to come forward.'
'I'm sorry, but how can I, when I have no more currency? ' was
Dunchill's calm reply.
'Not even any diamonds, perhaps? ' asked the actor.
'No diamonds either.'
The actor hung his head, reflected for a moment, then clapped his
hands. From the wings emerged a fashionably dressed middle-aged woman. The
woman looked worried as Dunchill stared at her without the flicker of an
eyelid.
'Who is this lady? ' the compere enquired of Dunchill.
'She is my wife,' replied Dunchill with dignity, looking at the woman
with a faint expression of repugnance.
'We regret the inconvenience to you, madame Dunchill,' said the
compere, ' but we have invited you here to ask you whether your husband has
surrendered all his foreign currency? '
'He handed it all in when he was told to,' replied madame Dunchill
anxiously.
'I see,' said the actor, ' well, if you say so, it must be true. If he
really has handed it all in, we must regretfully deprive ourselves of the
pleasure of Sergei Gerardovich's company. You may leave the theatre if you
wish, Sergei Gerardovich,' announced the compere with a regal gesture.
Calmly and with dignity Dunchill turned and walked towards the wings.
'Just a minute! ' The compere stopped him. ' Before you go just let me
show you one more number from our programme.' Again he clapped his hands.
The dark backdrop parted and a beautiful young woman in a ball gown
stepped on stage. She was holding a golden salver on which lay a thick
parcel tied with coloured ribbon, and round her neck she wore a diamond
necklace that flashed blue, yellow and red fire.
Dunchill took a step back and his face turned pale. Complete silence
gripped the audience.
'Eighteen thousand dollars and a necklace worth forty thousand gold
roubles,' the compere solemnly announced, ' belonging to Sergei Gerardovich
and kept for him in Kharkov in the flat of his mistress, Ida Herkulanovna
Vors, whom you have the pleasure of seeing before you now and who has kindly
consented to help in displaying these treasures which, priceless as they
are, are useless in private hands. Thank you very much, Ida Herkulanovna.'
The beauty flashed her teeth and fluttered her long eyelashes. ' And as
for you,' the actor said to Dunchill, ' we now know that beneath that
dignified mask lurks a vicious spider, a liar and a disgrace to our society.
For six weeks you have worn us all out with your stupid obstinacy. Go home
now and may the hell which your wife is preparing for you be your
punishment.'
Dunchill staggered and was about to collapse when a sympathetic pair of
arms supported him. The curtain then fell and bid the occupants of the stage
from sight.
Furious applause shook the auditorium until Nikanor Ivanovich thought
the lamps were going to jump out of the candelabra. When the curtain rose
again there was no one on stage except the actor. To another salvo of
applause he bowed and said :
'We have just shown you a typically stubborn case. Only yesterday I
was saying how senseless it was to try and conceal a secret hoard of foreign
currency. No one who has one can make use of it. Take Dunchill for example.
He is well paid and never short of anything. He has a splendid flat, a wife
and a beautiful mistress. Yet instead of acting like a law-abiding citizen
and handing in his currency and jewellery, all that this incorrigible rogue
has achieved is public exposure and a family scandal. So who wants to hand
in his currency? Nobody? In that case, the next number on our programme will
be that famous actor Savva Potapovich Kurolesov in excerpts from " The

Covetous Knight" by the poet Pushkin.'
Kurolesov entered, a tall, fleshy, clean-shaven man in tails and white
tie. Without a word of introduction he scowled, frowned and began, squinting
at the golden bell, to recite in an unnatural voice :
'Hastening to meet Ills courtesan, the young gallant. . .'
Kurolesov's recital described a tale of evil. He confessed how an
unhappy widow had knelt weeping before him in the rain, but the actor's hard
heart had remained untouched.
Until this dream, Nikanor Ivanovich knew nothing of the works of
Pushkin, although he knew his name well enough and almost every day he used
to make remarks like ' Who's going to pay the rent--Pushkin? ', or ' I
suppose Pushkin stole the light bulb on the staircase', or ' Who's going to
buy the fuel-oil for the boilers--Pushkin, I suppose? ' Now as he listened
to one of Pushkin's dramatic poems for the first time Nikanor Ivanovich felt
miserable, imagining the woman on her knees in the rain with her orphaned
children and he could not help thinking what a beast this fellow Kurolesov
must be.
The actor himself, his voice constantly rising, poured out his
repentance and finally he completely muddled Nikanor Ivanovich by talking to
someone who wasn't on the stage at all, then answered for the invisible man,
all the time calling himself first ' king ', then ' baron ', then ' father
', then ' son ' until the confusion was total. Nikanor Ivanovich only
managed to understand that the actor died a horrible death shouting ' My
keys! My keys! ', at which he fell croaking to the ground, having first
taken care to pull off his white tie.
Having died, Kurolesov got up, brushed the dust from his trousers,
bowed, smiled an insincere smile and walked off to faint applause. The
compere then said :
'In Sawa Potapovich's masterly interpretation we have just heard the
story of " The Covetous Knight". That knight saw himself as a Casanova; but
as you saw, nothing came of his efforts, no nymphs threw themselves at him,
the muses refused him their tribute, he built no palaces and instead he
finished miserably after an attack on his hoard of money and jewels. I warn
you that something of the kind will happen to you, if not worse, unless you
hand over your foreign currency! '
It may have been Pushkin's verse or it may have been the compere's
prosaic remarks which had such an effect; at all events a timid voice was
heard from the audience :
'I'll hand over my currency.'
'Please come up on stage,' was the compere's welcoming response as he
peered into the dark auditorium.
A short blond man, three weeks unshaven, appeared on stage.
'What is your name, please? ' enquired the compere.
'Nikolai Kanavkin ' was the shy answer.
'Ah! Delighted, citizen Kanavkin. Well? '
'I'll hand it over.'
'How much? '
'A thousand dollars and twenty gold ten-rouble pieces.'
'Bravo! Is that all you have? '
The compere stared straight into Kanavkin's eyes and it seemed to
Nikanor Ivanovich that those eyes emitted rays which saw through Kanavkin
like X-rays. The audience held its breath.
'I believe you! ' cried the actor at last and extinguished his gaze. '
I believe you! Those eyes are not lying! How many
times have I said that your fundamental error is to underestimate the
significance of the human eye. The tongue may hide the truth but the
eyes--never! If somebody springs a question you may not even flinch ; in a
second you are in control of yourself and you know what to say in order to
conceal the truth. You can be very convincing and not a wrinkle will flicker
in your expression, but alas! The truth will start forth in a flash from the
depths of your soul to your eyes and the game's up! You're caught!'
Having made this highly persuasive speech, the actor politely asked
Kanavkin:
'Where are they hidden? '

'At my aunt's, in Prechistenka.'
'Ah! That will be ... wait . . . yes, that's Claudia Ilyinishna
Porokhovnikova, isn't it? ' ' Yes.'
'Yes, yes, of course. A little bungalow, isn't it? Opposite a high
fence? Of course, I know it. And where have you put them? '
'In a box in the cellar.'
The actor clasped his hands.
'Oh, no! Really! ' he cried angrily. ' Its so damp there-- they'll
grow mouldy! People like that aren't to be trusted with money! What
child-like innocence. What will they do next?'
Kanavkin, realising that he was doubly at fault, hung his curly head.
'Money,' the actor went on, ' should be kept in the State Bank, in dry
and specially guarded strongrooms, but never in your aunt's cellar where
apart from anything else, the rats may get at it. Really, Kanavkin, you
should be ashamed : you--a grown man! '
Kanavkin did not know which way to look and could only twist the hem of
his jacket with his finger.
'All right,' the artist relented slightly, ' since you have owned up
we'll be lenient. . .' Suddenly he added unexpectedly : ' By the way . . .
we might as well kill two birds with one stone and not waste a car journey
... I expect your aunt has some of her own hidden away, hasn't she? '
Not expecting the conversation to take this turn, Kanavkin gave a start
and silence settled again on the audience.
'Ah, now, Kanavkin,' said the compere in a tone of kindly reproach, '
I was just going to say what a good boy you were I And now you have to go
and upset it all! That wasn't very clever, Kanavkin! Remember what I said
just now about your eyes? Well, I can see from your eyes that your aunt has
something hidden. Come on--don't tantalise us! '
'Yes, she has! ' shouted Kanavkin boldly.
'Bravo! ' cried the compere.
'Bravo! ' roared the audience.
When the noise had died down the compere congratulated Kanavkin, shook
him by the hand, offered him a car to take him home and ordered somebody in
the wings to go and see the aunt in the same car and invite her to appear in
the ladies' section of the programme.
'Oh yes, I nearly forgot to ask you--did your aunt tell you where she
has hidden hers? ' enquired the compere, offering Kanavkin a cigarette and a
lighted match. His cigarette lit, the wretched man gave an apologetic sort
of grin.
'Of course, I believe you. You don't know,' said the actor with a
sigh. ' I suppose the old skinflint wouldn't tell her nephew. Ah well, we
shall just have to try and appeal to her better nature. Perhaps we can still
touch a chord in her miserly old heart. Goodbye, Kanavkin--and good luck! '
Kanavkin departed relieved and happy. The actor then enquired whether
anyone else wished to surrender his foreign currency, but there was no
response.
'Funny, I must say! ' said the compere with a shrug of his shoulders
and the curtain fell.
The lights went out, there was darkness for a while, broken only by the
sound of a quavering tenor voice singing :
'Heaps of gold--and mine, all mine ...'
After a burst of applause, Nikanor Ivanovich's red-bearded neighbour
suddenly announced :
'There's bound to be a confession or two in the ladies' programme.'
Then with a sigh he added: ' oh, if only they don't get my geese! I have a
flock of geese at Lianozov, you see. They're savage birds, but I'm afraid
they'll die if I'm not there. They need a lot of looking after . . . Oh, if
only they don't take my geese! They don't impress me by quoting Pushkin . .
.' and he sighed again.
The auditorium was suddenly flooded with light and Nikanor Ivanovich
began dreaming that a gang of cooks started pouring through all the doors
into the auditorium. They wore white chef's hats, carried ladles and they
dragged into the theatre a vat full of soup and a tray of sliced black
bread. The audience livened up as the cheerful cooks pushed their way down

the aisle pouring the soup into bowls and handing out bread.
'Eat up, lads,' shouted the cooks, ' and hand over your currency! Why
waste your time sitting here? Own up and you can all go home! '
'What are you doing here, old man?' said a fat, red-necked cook to
Nikanor Ivanovich as he handed him a bowl of soup with a lone cabbage leaf
floating in it.
'I haven't got any! I haven't, I swear it,' shouted Nikanor Ivanovich
in a terrified voice.
'Haven't you? ' growled the cook in a fierce bass. ' Haven't you? ' he
enquired in a feminine soprano. ' No, I'm sure you haven't,' he muttered
gently as he turned into the nurse Praskovya Fyodorovna.
She gently shook Nikanor Ivanovich by the shoulder as he groaned in his
sleep. Cooks, theatre, curtain and stage dissolved. Through the tears in his
eyes Nikanor Ivanovich stared round at his hospital room and at two men in
white overalls. They turned out not to be cooks but doctors, standing beside
Praskovya Fyodorovna who instead of a soup-bowl was holding a gauze-covered
white enamelled dish containing a hypodermic syringe.
'What are you doing? ' said Nikanor Ivanovich bitterly as they gave
him an injection. ' I haven't any I tell you! Why doesn't Pushkin hand over
his foreign currency? I haven't got any! '
'No, of course you haven't,' said kind Praskovya Fyodorovna, ' and no
one is going to take you to court, so you can forget it and relax.'
After Ms injection Nikanor Ivanovich calmed down and fell into a
dreamless sleep.
His unrest, however, had communicated itself to No. 120 where the
patient woke up and began looking for his head; No. 118 where the nameless
master wrung his hands as he gazed at the moon, remembering that last bitter
autumn night, the patch of light under the door in his basement and the
girl's hair blown loose.
The anxiety from No. 118 flew along the balcony to Ivan, who woke up
and burst into tears.
The doctor soon calmed all his distraught patients and they went back
to sleep. Last of all was Ivan, who only dozed off as dawn began to break
over the river. As the sedative spread through his body, tranquillity
covered him like a slow wave. His body relaxed and his head was filled with
the warm breeze of slumber. As he fell asleep the last thing that he heard
was the dawn chorus of birds in the wood. But they were soon silent again
and he began dreaming that the sun had already set over Mount Golgotha and
that the hill was ringed by a double cordon. ...

16. The Execution

The sun had already set over Mount Golgotha and the hill was ringed by
a double cordon.
The cavalry ala that had held up the Procurator that morning had left
the city at a trot by the Hebron Gate, its route cleared ahead of it.
Infantrymen of the Cappadocian cohort pressed back a crowd of people, mules
and camels, and the ala, throwing up pillars of white dust, trotted towards
the crossroads where two ways met--one southward to Bethlehem, the other
northwestward to Jaffa. The ala took the north-westward route. More of the
Cappadocians had been posted along the edge of the road in time to clear the
route of all the caravans moving into Jerusalem for Passover. Crowds of
pilgrims stood behind the line of troops, leaving the temporary shelter of
their tents pitched on the grass. After about a kilometre the ala overtook
the second cohort of the Lightning legion and having gone a further
kilometre arrived first at the foot of Mount Golgotha. There the commander
hastily divided the ala into troops and cordoned off the base of the low
hill, leaving only a small gap where a path led from the Jaffa road to the

hilltop.
After a while the second cohort arrived, climbed up and formed another
cordon round the hill.
Last on the scene was the century under the command of Mark Muribellum.
It marched in two single files, one along each edge of the road, and between
them, escorted by a secret service detachment, drove the cart carrying the
three prisoners. Each wore a white board hung round his neck on which were
written the words ' Robber & Rebel' in Aramaic and Greek. Behind the
prisoners' cart came others, loaded with freshly sawn posts and
cross-pieces, ropes, spades, buckets and axes. They also carried six
executioners. Last in the convoy rode Mark the centurion, the captain of the
temple guard and the same hooded man with whom Pilate had briefly conferred
in a darkened room of the palace.
Although the procession was completely enclosed by troops, it was
followed by about two thousand curious sightseers determined to watch this
interesting spectacle despite the infernal heat. These spectators from the
city were now being joined by crowds of pilgrims, who were allowed to follow
the tail of the procession unhindered, as it made its way towards Mount
Golgotha to the bark of the heralds' voices as they repeated Pilate's
announcement.
The ala allowed them through as far as the second cordon, where the
century admitted only those concerned with the execution and then, with a
brisk manoeuvre, spread the crowd round the hill between the mounted cordon
below and the upper ring formed by the infantry, allowing the spectators to
watch the execution through a thin line of soldiery.
More than three hours had gone by since the procession had reached the
hill and although the sun over Mount Golgotha had already begun its descent,
the heat was still unbearable. The troops in both cordons were suffering
from it; stupefied with boredom, they cursed the three robbers and sincerely
wished them a quick death.
At the gap in the lower cordon the diminutive commander of the ala, his
forehead damp and his white tunic soaked with the sweat of his back,
occasionally walked over to the leather bucket in No. I. Troop's lines,
scooped up the water in handfuls, drank and moistened his turban. With this
slight relief from the heat he would return and recommence pacing up and
down the dusty path leading to the top. His long sword bumped against his
laced leather boot. As commander he had to set an example of endurance to
his men, but he considerately allowed them to stick their lances into the
ground and drape their white cloaks over the tops of the shafts. The Syrians
then sheltered from the pitiless sun under these makeshift tents. The
buckets emptied quickly and a rota of troopers was kept busy fetching water
from a ravine at the foot of the hill, where a muddy stream flowed in the
shade of a clump of gaunt mulberry trees. There, making the most of the
inadequate shade, the bored grooms lounged beside the horse-lines.
The troops were exhausted and their resentment of the victims was
understandable. Fortunately, however, Pilate's fears that disorders might
occur in Jerusalem during the execution were unjustified. When the fourth
hour of the execution had passed, against all expectation not a man remained
between the two cordons. The sun had scorched the crowd and driven it back
to Jerusalem. Beyond the ring formed by the two Roman centuries there were
only a couple of stray dogs. The heat had exhausted them too and they lay
panting with their tongues out, too weary even to chase the green-backed
lizards, the only creatures unafraid of the sun, which darted between the
broken stones and the spiny, ground-creeping cactus plants.
No one had tried to attack the prisoners, neither in Jerusalem, which
was packed with troops, nor on the cordoned hill. The crowd had drifted back
into town, bored by this dull execution and eager to join in the
preparations for the feast which were already under way in the city.
The Roman infantry forming the second tier was suffering even more
acutely than the cavalrymen. Centurion Muribellum's only concession to his
men was to allow them to take off their helmets and put on white headbands
soaked in water, but he kept them standing, lance in hand. The centurion
himself, also wearing a headband though a dry one, walked up and down a
short distance from a group of executioners without even removing his heavy

silver badges of rank, his sword or his dagger. The sun beat straight down
on the centurion without causing him the least distress and such was the
glitter from the silver of his lions' muzzles that a glance at them was
almost blinding.
Muribellum's disfigured face showed neither exhaustion nor displeasure
and the giant centurion seemed strong enough to keep pacing all day, all
night and all the next day. For as long as might be necessary he would go on
walking with his hands on his heavy bronze-studded belt, he would keep his
stern gaze either on the crucified victims or on the line of troops, or just
kick at the rubble on the ground with the toe of his rough hide boot,
indifferent to whether it was a whitened human bone or a small flint.
The hooded man had placed himself a short way from the gibbets on a
three-legged stool and sat in calm immobility, occasionally poking the sand
with a stick out of boredom.
It was not quite true that no one was left of the crowd between the
cordons. There was one man, but he was partly hidden. He was not near the
path, which was the best place from which to see the execution, but on the
northern side, where the hill was not smooth and passable but rough and
jagged with gulleys and fissures, at a spot where a sickly fig tree
struggled to keep alive on that arid soil by rooting itself in a crevice.
Although the fig tree gave no shade, this sole remaining spectator had
been sitting beneath it on a stone since the very start of the execution
four hours before. He had chosen the worst place to watch the execution,
although he had a direct view of the gibbets and could even see the two
glittering badges on the centurion's chest. His vantage point seemed
adequate, however, for a man who seemed anxious to remain out of sight.
Yet four hours ago this man had behaved quite differently and had made
himself all too conspicuous, which was probably the reason why he had now
changed his tactics and withdrawn to solitude. When the procession had
reached the top of the hill he had been the first of the crowd to appear and
he had shown all the signs of a man arriving late. He had run panting up the
hill, pushing people aside, and when halted by the cordon he had made a
naive attempt, by pretending not to understand their angry shouts, to break
through the line of soldiers and reach the place of execution where the
prisoners were already being led off the cart. For this he had earned a
savage blow on the chest with the blunt end of a lance and had staggered
back with a cry, not of pain but of despair. He had stared at the legionary
who had hit him with the bleary, indifferent look of a man past feeling
physical pain.
Gasping and clutching his chest he had run round to the northern side
of the hill, trying to find a gap in the cordon where he might slip through.
But it was too late, the chain had been closed. And the man, his face
contorted with grief, had had to give up trying to break through to the
carts, from which men were unloading the gibbet-posts. Any such attempt
would have led to his arrest and as his plans for that day did not include
being arrested, he had hidden himself in the crevice where he could watch
unmolested.
Now as he sat on his stone, his eyes festering from heat, dust and lack
of sleep, the black-bearded man felt miserable. First he would sigh, opening
his travel-worn tallith, once blue but now turned dirty grey, and bare his
sweating, bruised chest, then he would raise his eyes to the sky in
inexpressible agony, following the three vultures who had long been circling
the hilltop in expectation of a feast, then gaze hopelessly at the yellow
soil where he stared at the half-crushed skull of a dog and the lizards that
scurried around it.
The man was in such distress that now and again he would talk to
himself.
'Oh, I am a fool,' he mumbled, rocking back and forth in agony of soul
and scratching his swarthy chest. ' I'm a fool, as stupid as a woman--and
I'm a coward! I'm a lump of carrion, not a man I '
He hung his head in silence, then revived by a drink of tepid water
from his wooden flask he gripped the knife hidden under his tallith or
fingered the piece of parchment lying on a stone in front of him with a
stylus and a bladder of ink.

On the parchment were some scribbled notes :
'Minutes pass while I, Matthew the Levite, sit here on Mount Golgotha
and still he is not dead!'
Late:
'The sun is setting and death not yet come.' Hopelessly, Matthew now
wrote with his sharp stylus :
'God! Why are you angry with him? Send him death.'
Having written this, he gave a tearless sob and again scratched his
chest.
The cause of the Levite's despair was his own and Yeshua's terrible
failure. He was also tortured by the fatal mistake which he, Matthew, had
committed. Two days before, Yeshua and Matthew had been in Bethphagy near
Jerusalem, where they had been staying with a market gardener who had taken
pleasure in Yeshua's preaching. All that morning the two men had helped
their host at work in his garden, intending to walk on to Jerusalem in the
cool of the evening. But for some reason Yeshua had been in a hurry, saying
that he had something urgent to do in the city, and had set off alone at
noon. That was Matthew the Levite's first mistake. Why, why had he let him
go alone?
That evening Matthew had been unable to go to Jerusalem, as he had
suffered a sudden and unexpected attack of sickness. He shivered, his body
felt as if it were on fire and he constantly begged for water.
To go anywhere was out of the question. He had collapsed on to a rug in
the gardener's courtyard and had lain there until dawn on Friday, when the
sickness left Matthew as suddenly as it had struck him. Although still weak,
he had felt oppressed by a foreboding of disaster and bidding his host
farewell had set out for Jerusalem. There he had learned that his foreboding
had not deceived him and that the disaster had occurred. The Levite had been
in the crowd that had heard the Procurator pronounce sentence.
When the prisoners were taken away to Mount Golgotha, Matthew the
Levite ran alongside the escort amid the crowd of sightseers, trying to give
Yeshua an inconspicuous signal that at least he, the Levite, was here with
him, that he had not abandoned him on his last journey and that he was
praying for Yeshua to be granted a quick death. But Yeshua, staring far
ahead to where they were taking him, could not see Matthew.
Then, when the procession had covered half a mile or so of the way,
Matthew, who was being pushed along by the crowd level with the prisoners'
cart, was struck by a brilliant and simple idea. In his fervour he cursed
himself for not having thought of it before. The soldiers were not marching
in close order, but with a gap between each man. With great dexterity and
very careful timing it would be possible to bend down and jump between two
legionaries, reach the cart and jump on it. Then Yeshua would be saved from
an agonising death. A moment would be enough to stab Yeshua in the back with
a knife, having shouted to him: ' Yeshua! I shall save you and depart with
you! I, Matthew, your faithful and only disciple!'
And if God were to bless him with one more moment of freedom he could
stab himself as well and avoid a death on the gallows. Not that Matthew, the
erstwhile tax-collector, cared much how he died: he wanted only one
thing--that Yeshua, who had never done anyone the least harm in his life,
should be spared the torture of crucifixion.
The plan was a very good one, but it had a great flaw--the Levite had
no knife and no money.
Furious with himself, Matthew pushed his way out of the crowd and ran
back to the city. His head burned with the single thought of how he might at
once, by whatever means, find a knife somewhere in town and then catch up
with the procession again.
He ran as far as the city gate, slipping through the crowd of pilgrims'
caravans pouring into town, and saw on his left the open door of a baker's
shop. Breathless from running on the hot road, the Levite pulled himself
together, entered the shop very sedately, greeted the baker's wife standing
behind the counter, asked her for a loaf from the top shelf which he
affected to prefer to all the rest and as she turned round, he silently and
quickly snatched off the counter the very thing he had been looking for--a
long, ra2or-sharp breadknife--and fled from the shop.

A few minutes later he was back on the Jaffa road, but the procession
was out of sight. He ran. Once or twice he had to drop and lie motionless to
regain his breath, to the astonishment of all the passers-by making for
Jerusalem on mule-back or on foot. As he lay he could hear the beat of his
heart in his chest, in his head and his ears. Rested, he stood up and began
running again, although his pace grew slower and slower. When he finally
caught sight again of the long, dusty procession, it had already reached the
foot of the hill.
'Oh, God! ' groaned the Levite. He knew he was too late.
With the passing of the fourth hour of the execution Matthew's torments
reached their climax and drove him to a frenzy. Rising from his stone, he
hurled the stolen knife to the ground, crushed his flask with his foot, thus
depriving himself of water, snatched the kefiyeh from his head, tore his
flowing hair and cursed himself. As he cursed in streams of gibberish,
bellowed and spat, Matthew slandered his father and mother for begetting
such a fool.
Since cursing and swearing had no apparent effect at all and changed
nothing in that sun-scorched inferno, he clenched his dry fists and raised
them heavenwards to the sun as it slowly descended, lengthening the shadows
before setting into the Mediterranean. The Levite begged God to perform a
miracle and allow Yeshua to die.
When he opened his eyes again nothing on the hill had changed, except
that the light no longer flashed from the badges on the centurion's chest.
The sun was shining on the victims' backs, as their faces were turned east
towards Jerusalem. Then the Levite cried out:
'I curse you. God! '
In a hoarse voice he shouted that God was unjust and that he would
believe in him no more.
'You are deaf! ' roared Matthew. ' If you were not deaf you would have
heard me and killed him in the instant!'
His eyes tight shut, the Levite waited for the fire to strike him from
heaven. Nothing happened. Without opening his eyes, he vented his spite in a
torrent of insults to heaven. He shouted that his faith was ruined, that
there were other gods and better. No other god would have allowed a man like
Yeshua to be scorched to death on a pole.
'No--I was wrong! ' screamed the Levite, now quite hoarse. ' You are a
God of evil! Or have your eyes been blinded by the smoke of sacrifices from
the temple and have your ears grown deaf to everything but the trumpet-calls
of the priests? You are not an almighty God--you are an evil God! I curse
you. God of robbers, their patron and protector! '
At that moment there was a puff of air in his face and something
rustled under his feet. Then came another puff and as he opened his eyes the
Levite saw that everything, either as a result of his imprecations or from
some other cause, had changed. The sun had been swallowed by a thundercloud
looming up, threatening and inexorable, from the west. Its edges were white
and ragged, its rumbling black paunch tinged with sulphur. White pillars of
dust, raised by the sudden wind, flew along the Jaffa road. The Levite was
silent, wondering if the storm which was about to break over Jerusalem might
alter the fate of the wretched Yeshua. Watching the tongues of lightning
that flickered round the edges of the cloud, he began to pray for one to
strike Yeshua's gibbet. Glancing penitently up at the remaining patches of
blue sky in which the vultures were winging away to avoid the storm, Matthew
knew that he had cursed too soon: God would not listen to him now.
Turning round to look at the foot of the hill, the Levite stared at the
cavalry lines and saw that they were on the move. From his height he had a
good view of the soldiers' hasty preparations as they pulled their lances
out of the ground and threw their cloaks over their shoulders. The grooms
were running towards the path, leading strings of troop horses. The regiment
was moving out. Shielding his face with his hand and spitting out the sand
that blew into his mouth, the Levite tried to think why the cavalry should
be preparing to go. He shifted his glance higher up the hill and made out a
figure in a purple military chlamys climbing up towards the place of
execution. Matthew's heart leaped : he sensed a quick end. The man climbing
Mount Golgotha in the victims' fifth hour of suffering was the Tribune of

the Cohort, who had galloped from Jerusalem accompanied by an orderly. At a
signal from Muribellum the cordon of soldiers opened and the centurion
saluted the Tribune, who took Muribellum aside and whispered something to
him. The centurion saluted again and walked over to the executioners, seated
on stones under the gibbets. The Tribune meanwhile turned towards the man on
the three-legged stool. The seated man rose politely as the Tribune
approached him. The officer said something to him in a low voice and both
walked over to the gallows, where they were joined by the captain of the
temple guard.
Muribellum, with a fastidious grimace at the filthy rags lying on the
ground near the crosses--the prisoners' clothes which even the executioners
had spurned--called to two of them and gave an order:
'Follow me!'
A hoarse, incoherent song could just be heard coming from the nearest
gibbet. Hestas had been driven out of his mind two hours ago by the flies
and the heat and was now softly croaking something about a vineyard. His
turbaned head still nodded occasionally, sending up a lazy cloud of flies
from his face.
Dismas on the second cross was suffering more than the other two
because he was still conscious and shaking his head regularly from side to
side.
Yeshua was luckier. He had begun to faint during the first hour, and
had then lapsed into unconsciousness, his head drooping in its ragged
turban. As a result the mosquitoes and horse-flies had settled on him so
thickly that his face was entirely hidden by a black, heaving mask. All over
his groin, his stomach and under his armpits sat bloated horseflies, sucking
at the yellowing naked body.
At a gesture from the man in the hood one of the executioners picked up
a lance and the other carried a bucket and sponge to the gibbet. The first
executioner raised the lance and used it to hit Yeshua first on one extended
arm and then on the other.
The emaciated body gave a twitch. The executioner then poked Yeshua in
the stomach with the handle of the lance. At this Yeshua raised his head,
the flies rose with a buzz and the victim's face was revealed, swollen with
bites, puff-eyed, unrecognisable.
Forcing open his eyelids, Ha-Notsri looked down. His usually clear eyes
were now dim and glazed.
'Ha-Notsri!' said the executioner.
Ha-Notsri moved his swollen lips and answered in a hoarse croak:
'What do you want? Why have you come? '
'Drink! ' said the executioner and a water-soaked sponge was raised to
Yeshua's lips on the point of a lance. Joy lit up his eyes, he put his mouth
to the sponge and greedily sucked its moisture. From the next gibbet came
the voice of Dismas :
'It's unjust! He's as much a crook as me! '
Dismas strained ineffectually, his arms being lashed to the cross-bar
in three places. He arched his stomach, clawed the end of the crossbeam with
his nails and tried to turn his eyes, full of envy and hatred, towards
Yeshua's cross.
'Silence on the second gibbet! '
Dismas was silent. Yeshua turned aside from the sponge. He tried to
make his voice sound kind and persuasive, but failed and could only croak
huskily :
'Give him a drink too.'
It was growing darker. The cloud now filled half the sky as it surged
towards Jerusalem; smaller white clouds fled before the black monster
charged with fire and water. There was a flash and a thunderclap directly
over the hill. The executioner took the sponge from the lance.
'Hail to the merciful hegemon! ' he whispered solemnly and gently
pierced Yeshua through the heart. Yeshua shuddered and whispered:
'Hegemon . . .'
Blood ran down his stomach, his lower jaw twitched convulsively and his
head dropped. At the second thunderclap the executioner gave the sponge to
Dismas with the same words :

'Hail, hegemon . . .' and killed him.
Hestas, his reason gone, cried out in fear as the executioner
approached him, but when the sponge touched his lips he gave a roar and sank
his teeth into it. A few seconds later his body was hanging as limply as the
ropes would allow.
The man in the hood followed the executioner and the centurion; behind
him in turn came the captain of the temple guard. Stopping at the first
gibbet the hooded man carefully inspected Yeshua's bloodstained body,
touched the pole with his white hand and said to his companions :
'Dead.'
The same was repeated at the other two gallows.
After this the Tribune gestured to the centurion and turned to walk
down the hill with the captain of the temple guard and the hooded man.
It was now twilight and lightning was furrowing the black sky. Suddenly
there was a brilliant flash and the centurion's shout of' Fall out, the
cordon! ' was drowned in thunder. The delighted soldiers started running
down hill, buckling on their helmets as they went.
A mist had covered Jerusalem.
The downpour struck suddenly and caught the centurion halfway down the
hill. The rain fell with such force that turbulent streams began catching
them up as they ran. The troops slithered and fell on the muddy soil as they
hurried to reach the main road. Moving fast, now scarcely visible in a veil
of water, the rain-soaked cavalry was already on its way back to Jerusalem.
After a few minutes only one man was left on the hill in the smoking
cauldron of wind, water and fire.
Brandishing his stolen knife, for which he now had a use after all,
leaping over the slippery rocks, grasping whatever came to hand, at times
crawling on his knees, he stumbled towards the gallows in alternate spells
of complete darkness and flashes of light. When he reached the gallows he
was already ankle-deep in water and threw off his soaking tallith. Wearing
only his shirt Matthew fell at Yeshua's feet. He cut the ropes round his
knees, climbed on to the lower crossbar, embraced Yeshua and freed his arms
from their bonds. Yeshua's wet, naked body collapsed on to Matthew and
dragged him to the ground. The Levite was just about to hoist him on to his
shoulders when another thought stopped him. He left the body on the watery
ground, its head thrown back and arms outstretched, and ran, slithering, to
the other gibbet-posts. He cut their ropes and the two bodies fell to the
ground.
A few minutes later only those two water-lashed bodies and three empty
gibbets remained on Mount Golgotha. Matthew the Levite and Yeshua were gone.

17. A Day of Anxiety

On Friday morning, the day after the disastrous show, the permanent
staff of the Variety Theatre--Vassily Stepanovich Lastochkin the accountant,
two bookkeepers, three typists, the two cashiers, the ushers, the
commissionaires and the cleaners-- were not at work but were instead sitting
on the window-ledges looking out on to Sadovaya Street and watching what was
happening outside the theatre. There beneath the theatre walls wound a
double queue of several thousand people whose tail-end had already reached
Kudrinskaya Square. At the head of the queue stood a couple of dozen of the
leading lights of the Moscow theatrical world.
The queue was in a state of high excitement, attracting the attention
of the passers-by and busily swapping hair-raising stories about the
previous evening's incredible performance of black magic. Vassily
Stepanovich the accountant, who had not been at yesterday's show, was
growing more and more uneasy. The commissionaires were saying unbelievable
things, such as how after the show a number of ladies had been seen on the
street in a highly improper state. The shy and unassuming Vassily

Stepanovich could only blink as he listened to the description of all these
sensations and felt utterly unable to decide what to do ; meanwhile
something had to be done and it was he who had to do it, as he was now the
senior remaining member of the Variety's management.
By ten o'clock the ticket queue had swollen to such a size that the
police came to hear of it and rapidly sent some detachments of horse and
foot to reduce the queue to order. Unfortunately the mere existence of a
mile-long queue was enough to cause a minor riot in spite of all the police
could do.
Inside the Variety things were as confused as they were outside. The
telephone had been ringing since early morning-- ringing in Likhodeyev's
office, in Rimsky's office, in the accounts department, in the box-office
and in Varenukha's office. At first Vassily Stepanovich had attempted to
answer, the cashier had tried to cope, the commissionaires had mumbled
something into the telephone when it rang, but soon they stopped answering
altogether because there was simply no answer to give the people asking
where Likhodeyev, Rimsky and Varenukha were. They had been able to put them
off the scent for a while by saying that Likhodeyev was in his flat, but
this only produced more angry calls later, declaring that they had rung
Likhodeyev's flat and been told that he was at the Variety.
One agitated lady rang up and demanded to speak to Rimsky and was
advised to ring his wife at home, at which the earpiece, sobbing, replied
that she was Rimsky's wife and he was nowhere to be found. Odd stories began
to circulate. One of the charwomen was telling everyone that when she had
gone to clean the treasurer's office she had found the door ajar, the lights
burning, the window on to the garden smashed, a chair overturned on the
floor and no one in the room.
At eleven o'clock Madame Rimsky descended on the Variety, weeping and
wringing her hands. Vassily Stepanovich was by now utterly bewildered and
unable to offer her any advice. Then at half past eleven the police
appeared. Their first and very reasonable question was :
'What's happening here? What is all this? '
The staff" retreated, pushing forward the pale and agitated Vassily
Stepanovich. Describing the situation as it really was, he had to admit that
the entire management of the Variety, including the general manager, the
treasurer and the house manager, had vanished without trace, that last
night's compere had been removed to a lunatic asylum and that, in short,
yesterday's show had been a catastrophe.
Having done their best to calm her, the police sent the sobbing
Madame Rimsky home, then turned with interest to the charwoman's story
about the state of the treasurer's office. The staff were told to go and get
on with their jobs and after a short while the detective squad turned up,
leading a sharp-eared muscular dog, the colour of cigarette ash and with
extremely intelligent eyes. At once a rumour spread among the Variety
Theatre staff that the dog was none other than the famous Ace of Diamonds.
It was. Its behaviour amazed everybody. No sooner had the animal walked into
the treasurer's office than it growled, bared its monstrous yellowish teeth,
then crouched on its stomach and crept towards the broken window with a look
of mingled terror and hostility. Mastering its fear the dog suddenly leaped
on to the window ledge, raised its great muzzle and gave an eerie, savage
howl. It refused to leave the window, growled, trembled and crouched as
though wanting to jump out of the window.
The dog was led out of the office to the entrance hall, from whence it
went out of the main doors into the street and across the road to the
taxi-rank. There it lost the scent. After that Ace of Diamonds was taken
away.
The detectives settled into Varenukha's office, where one after the
other, they called in all the members of the Variety staff who had witnessed
the events of the previous evening. At every step the detectives were beset
with unforeseen difficulties. The thread kept breaking in their hands.
Had there been any posters advertising the performance? Yes, there had.
But since last night new ones had been pasted over them and now there was
not a single one to be found anywhere. Where did this magician come from?
Nobody knew. Had a contract been signed?

'I suppose so,' replied Vassily Stepanovich miserably.
'And if so it will have gone through the books, won't it? '
'Certainly,' replied Vassily Stepanovich in growing agitation.
'Then where is it? '
'It's not here,' replied the accountant, turning paler and spreading
his hands. It was true : there was no trace of a contract in the accounts
department files, the treasurer's office, Likhodeyev's office or Varenukha's
office.
What was the magician's surname? Vassily Stepanovich did not know, he
had not been at yesterday's show. The commissionaires did not know, the
box-office cashier frowned and frowned, thought and thought, and finally
said :
'Wo ... I think it was Woland. . . .'
Perhaps it wasn't Woland? Perhaps it wasn't. Perhaps it was Poland.
The Aliens' Bureau, it appeared, had never heard of anyone called
Woland or Poland or any other black magician. Karpov, an usher, said that as
far as he knew the magician was staying at Likhodeyev's flat. Naturally they
immediately went to the flat, but there was no sign of a magician living
there. Likhodeyev himself was also missing. The maid Grunya was not there
and nobody knew where she was. Both the house committee chairman, Nikanor
Ivanovich, and the secretary, Prolezhnev, had also vanished.
The investigation so far appeared to amount to a total absurdity : the
entire management had vanished, there had been a scandalous show the
previous evening--but who had arranged it? Nobody knew.
Meanwhile it was nearly noon, time for the box office to open. This, of
course, was out of the question. A large piece of cardboard was hung on the
Variety's doors with the announcement:
today's
PERFORMANCE
CANCELLED
This caused a stir in the queue, beginning at its head, but the
excitement subsided and the queue began to disperse. After an hour there was
scarcely a trace of it on Sadovaya Street. The detectives left to pursue
their inquiries elsewhere, the staff, except for the watchmen, were
dismissed and the doors of the Variety were closed.
Vassily Stepanovich the accountant had two urgent tasks to perform.
Firstly to go to the Commission for Theatrical Spectacles and Light
Entertainment with a report on the previous day's events and then to deposit
yesterday's takings of 21,711 roubles at the Commission's finance
department.
The meticulous and efficient Vassily Stepanovich wrapped the money in
newspaper, tied it up with string, put it into his briefcase and following
his standing instructions avoided taking a bus or tram but went instead to
the nearby taxi-rank.
As soon as the three cab-drivers on the rank saw a fare approaching
with a chock-full briefcase under his arm, all three of them instantly drove
off empty, scowling back as they went. Amazed, the accountant stood for a
while wondering what this odd behaviour could mean. After about three
minutes an empty cab drove up the the rank, the driver grimacing with
hostility when he saw his fare.
'Are you free? ' asked Vassily Stepanovich with an anxious cough.
'Show me your money,' snarled the driver.
Even more amazed, the accountant clutched his precious briefcase under
one arm, pulled a ten-rouble note out of his wallet and showed it to the
driver.
'I'm not taking you,' he said curtly.
'Excuse me, but . . .' The accountant began, but the driver
interrupted him:
'Got a three-rouble note? '
The bewildered accountant took out two three-rouble notes from his
wallet and showed them to the driver.
'O.K., get in,' he shouted, slamming down the flag of his meter so

hard that he almost broke it. ' Let's go.'
'Are you short of change? ' enquired the accountant timidly.
'Plenty of change! ' roared the driver and his eyes, reddened with
fury, glared at Vassily Stepanovich from the mirror. ' Third time it's
happened to me today. Just the same with the others. Some son of a bitch
gives me a tenner and I give him four-fifty change. Out he gets, the
bastard! Five minutes later I look--instead of a tenner there's a label off
a soda-water bottle! ' Here the driver said several unprintable words. '
Picked up another fare on Zaborskaya. Gives me a tenner--I give him three
roubles change. Gets out. I look in my bag and out flies a bee! Stings me on
the finger! I'll . . .' The driver spat out more unprintable words. ' And
there was no tenner. There was a show on at that (unprintable) Variety
yesterday evening and some (unprintable) conjurer did a turn with a lot of
(unprintable) ten-rouble notes . . .'
The accountant was dumbstruck. He hunched himself up and tried to look
as if he was hearing the very word ' Variety ' for the first time in his
life as he thought to himself: ' Well I'm damned! '
Arrived at his destination and paying in proper money, the accountant
went into one building and hurried along the corridor to the chief cashier's
office, but even before he reached it he realised that he had come at a bad
moment. A rumpus was going on in the offices of the Theatrical Commission. A
cleaner ran past him with her headscarf awry and bulging eyes.
'He's not there! He's not there, dear,' she screamed, turning to
another man hurrying along the passage. ' His jacket and trousers are there
but there's nobody in 'em! '
She disappeared through a door, from which there at once came the sound
of smashing crockery. Vassily Stepanovich then saw the familiar figure of
the chief cashier come running out of the secretaries' office and vanish,
but the man was in such a state that he failed to recognise Vasilly
Stepanovich.
Slightly shaken, the accountant reached the door of the secretaries'
office, which was the ante-room to the chairman's office, where he had the
greatest shock of all.
Through the far door came a terrible voice, unmistakably belonging to
Prokhor Petrovich, the chairman of the Commission. ' I suppose he's telling
somebody off,' thought the puzzled accountant. Looking round, he saw
something else--there, in a leather armchair, her head resting on the back,
sobbing uncontrollably and clutching a wet handkerchief, her legs stretched
out to the middle of the floor, lay Prokhor Petrovich's secretary, the
beautiful Anna Richardovna. Her chin was smeared with lipstick and streaks
of dissolved mascara were running down her peach-skin cheeks.
Seeing him come in, Anna Richardovna jumped up, ran to Vassily
Stepanovich, clutched his lapels and began to shake him, howling:
'Thank God! At least there's one of you brave enough! They've all run
away, they've all let us down! Come and see him, I don't know what to do! '
Still sobbing she dragged him into the chairman's office.
Once inside Vassily Stepanovich dropped his briefcase in horror.
Behind the huge desk with its massive inkwell sat an empty suit. A dry
pen was hurrying, unheld, across a sheet of paper. The suit had a shirt and
tie, a fountain pen was clipped in its breast-pocket, but above the collar
there was no neck and no head and there were no wrists protruding from the
cuffs. The suit was hard at work and oblivious of the uproar round about.
Hearing someone come in, the suit leaned back in its chair and from
somewhere just above the collar came the familiar voice of Prokhor
Petrovich:
'What is it? There's a notice on the door saying that I'm not seeing
visitors.'
The beautiful secretary moaned and cried, wringing her hands :
'Don't you see? He's not there! Bring him back, oh bring him back!'
Someone peeped round the door, groaned and flew out again. Vassily
Stepanovich felt his legs shaking and he sat down on the edge of a
chair--not forgetting, though, to hold on to his briefcase. Anna Richardovna
pranced round Vassily Stepanovich, pulling at his coat and shrieking :
'I've always, always stopped him whenever he began swearing! Now he's

sworn once too often!' The girl ran to the desk and exclaimed in a tender,
musical voice, slightly nasal from so much weeping: ' Prosha dear, where are
you? '
'Who are you addressing as " Prosha "? ' enquired the suit haughtily,
drawing further back into the chair.
'He doesn't recognise me! He doesn't recognise me! Don't you see? '
sobbed the girl.
'Kindly stop crying in my office!' said the striped suit irritably,
stretching out its sleeve for a fresh pile of paper.
'No, I can't look, I can't look! ' cried Anna Richardovna and ran back
into her office, followed, like a bullet, by the accountant.
'Just imagine--I was sitting here,' began Anna Richardovna trembling
with horror and clutching Vassily Stepanovich's sleeve, ' when in came a
cat. A great black animal as big as Behemoth. Naturally I shooed it out and
it went, but then a fat man came in who also had a face like a cat, said "
Do you always say ' shoo ' to visitors?" and went straight in to Prokhor
Petrovich. So I shouted " What d'you mean by going in there --have you gone
crazy? " But the cheeky brute marched straight in to Prokhor Petrovich and
sat down in the chair facing him. Well, Prokhor is the nicest man alive, but
he's nervous. He lost his temper. He works like a trojan, but he's apt to be
nervy and he just flared up. " Why have you come in here without being
announced? " he said. And then, if you please, that impudent creature
stretched out in his chair and said with a smile : " I've come to have a
chat with you on a little matter of business." Prokhor Petrovich snapped at
him again :
" I'm busy," to which the beast said: " You're not busy at all ..." How
d'you like that? Well, of course, Prokhor Petrovich lost all patience then
and shouted: " What is all this? Damn me if I don't have you thrown out of
here! " The beast just smiled and said: " Damn you, I think you said? Very
well! " And--bang! Before I could even scream, I looked and cat-face had
gone and there was this . . . suit . . . sitting . . . Oooooh! ' Stretching
her mouth into a shapeless cavity Anna Richardovna gave a howl. Choking back
her sobs she took a deep breath but could only gulp nonsensically:
'And it goes on writing and writing and writing! I must be going off
my head! It talks on the telephone! The suit! They've all run away like
rabbits! '
Vassily Stepanovich could only stand there, trembling. Fate rescued
him. Into the secretaries' office with a firm, regular tread marched two
policemen. Catching sight of them the lovely girl began sobbing even harder
and pointed towards the office door.
'Now, now, miss, let's not cry,' said the first man calmly. Vassily
Stepanovich, deciding that he was superfluous, skipped away and a minute
later was out in the fresh air. His head felt hollow, something inside it
was booming like a trumpet and the noise reminded him of the story told by
one of the commissionaires about a cat which had taken part in yesterday's
show. ' Aha! Perhaps it's our little pussy up to his tricks again? '
Having failed to hand in the money at the Commission's head office, the
conscientious Vassily Stepanovich decided to go to the branch office, which
was in Vagankovsky Street and to calm himself a little he made his way there
on foot.
The branch office of the Theatrical Commission was quartered in a
peeling old house at the far end of a courtyard, which was famous for the
porphyry columns in its hallway. That day, however, the visitors to the
house were not paying much attention to the porphyry columns.
Several visitors were standing numbly in the hall and staring at a
weeping girl seated behind a desk full of theatrical brochures which it was
her job to sell. The girl seemed to have lost interest in her literature and
only waved sympathetic enquirers away, whilst from above, below and all
sides of the building came the pealing of at least twenty desperate
telephones.
Weeping, the girl suddenly gave a start and screamed hysterically :
'There it is again! ' and began singing in a wobbly soprano :
'Yo-o, heave-ho! Yo-o heave-ho! '

A messenger, who had appeared on the staircase, shook his fist at
somebody and joined the girl, singing in a rough, tuneless baritone:
'One more heave, lads, one more heave . . .'
Distant voices chimed in, the choir began to swell until finally the
song was booming out all over the building. In nearby room No. 6, the
auditor's department, a powerful hoarse bass voice boomed out an octave
below the rest. The chorus was accompanied crescendo by a peal of telephone
bells.
'All day lo-ong we must trudge the sbore,' roared the messenger on the
staircase.
Tears poured down the girl's face as she tried to clench her teeth, but
her mouth opened of its own accord and she sang an octave above the
messenger :
'Work all da-ay and then work more . . .'
What surprised the dumbfounded visitors was the fact that the singers,
spread all through the building, were keeping excellent time, as though the
whole choir were standing together and watching an invisible conductor.
Passers-by in Vagankovsky Street stopped outside the courtyard gates,
amazed to hear such sounds of harmony coming from the Commission.
As soon as the first verse was over, the singing stopped at once, as
though in obedience to a conductor's baton. The messenger swore under his
breath and ran off.
The front door opened and in walked a man wearing a light coat on top
of a white overall, followed by a policeman.
'Do something, doctor, please! ' screamed the hysterical girl.
The secretary of the branch office ran out on to the staircase and
obviously burning with embarrassment and shame said between hiccups:
'Look doctor, we have a case of some kind of mass hypnosis, so you
must. . .' He could not finish his sentence, stuttered and began singing
'Shilka and Nerchinsk . . .'
'Fool! ' the girl managed to shout, but never managed to say who she
meant and instead found herself forced into a trill and joined in the song
about Shilka and Nerchinsk.
'Pull yourselves together! Stop singing!' said the doctor to the
secretary.
It was obvious that the secretary would have given anything to stop
singing but could not.
When the verse was finished the girl at the desk received a dose of
valerian from the doctor, who hurried off to give the secretary and the rest
the same treatment.
'Excuse me, miss,' Vassily Stepanovich suddenly asked the girl, ' has
a black cat been in here? '
'What cat? ' cried the girl angrily. ' There's a donkey in this
office--a donkey! ' And she went on : 'If you want to hear about it I'll
tell you exactly what's happened.'
Apparently the director of the branch office had a mania for organising
clubs.
'He does it all without permission from head office! ' said the girl
indignantly.
In the course of a year the branch director had succeeded in organising
a Lermontov Club, a Chess and Draughts Club, a Ping-Pong Club and a Riding
Club. In summer he threatened to organise a rowing club and a mountaineering
club. And then this morning in came the director at lunch time . . .
'. . . arm in arm with some villain,' said the girl, ' that he'd picked
up God knows where, wearing check trousers, with a wobbling pince-nez . . .
and an absolutely impossible face! '
There and then, according to the girl, he had introduced him to all the
lunchers in the dining-room as a famous specialist in organising choral
societies.
The faces of the budding mountaineers darkened, but the director told
them to cheer up and the specialist made jokes and assured them on his oath
that singing would take up very little time and was a wonderfully useful
accomplishment.
Well, of course, the girl went on, the first two to jump up were Fanov

and Kosarchuk, both well-known toadies, and announced that they wanted to
join. The rest of the staff realised that there was no way out of it, so
they all joined the choral society too. It was decided to practise during
the lunch break, because all the rest of their spare time was already taken
up with Lermontov and draughts. To set an example the director announced
that he sang tenor. What happened then was like a bad dream. The check-clad
chorus master bellowed: ' Do, mi, sol, do!' He dragged some of the shy
members out from behind a cupboard where they had been trying to avoid
having to sing, told Kosarchuk that he had perfect pitch, whined, whimpered,
begged them to show him some respect as an old choirmaster, struck a tuning
fork on his finger and announced that they would begin with ' The Song of
the Volga Boatmen '.
They struck up. And they sang very well--the man in the check suit
really did know his job. They sang to the end of the first verse. Then the
choirmaster excused himself, saying : ' I'll be back in a moment . . .'--and
vanished. Everybody expected him back in a minute or two, but ten minutes
went by and there was still no sign of him. The staff were delighted--he had
run away!
Then suddenly, as if to order, they all began singing the second verse,
led by Kosarchuk, who may not have had perfect pitch but who had quite a
pleasant high tenor. They finished the verse. Still no conductor. Everybody
started to go back to their tables, but they had no time to eat before quite
against their will they all started singing again. And they could not stop.
There would be three minutes' silence and they would burst out into song
again. Silence--then more singing! Soon people began to realise that
something terrible was happening. The director locked himself in his office
out of shame.
With this the girl's story broke off--even valerian was no use,
A quarter of an hour later three lorries drove up to the gateway on
Vagankovsky Street and the entire branch staff, headed by the director, was
put into them. Just as the first lorry drove through the gate and out into
the street, the staff, standing in the back of the lorry and holding each
other round the shoulders, all opened their mouths and deafened the whole
street with a song. The second lorry-load joined in and then the third. On
they drove, singing. The passers-by hurrying past on their own business gave
the lorries no more than a glance and took no notice, thinking that it was
some works party going on an excursion out of town. They were certainly
heading out of town, but not for an outing: they were bound for Professor
Stravinsky's clinic.
Half an hour later the distracted Vassily Stepanovich reached the
accounts department hoping at last to be able to get rid of his large sum of
money. Having learned from experience, he first gave a cautious glance into
the long hall, where the cashiers sat behind frosted-glass windows with gilt
markings. He found no sign of disturbance or upheaval. All was as quiet as
it should be in such a respectable establishment.
Vassily Stepanovich stuck his head through the window marked ' Paying
In ', said good-day to the clerk and politely asked for a paying-in slip.
'What do you want? ' asked the clerk behind the window.
The accountant looked amazed.
'I want to pay in, of course. I'm from the Variety.'
'One minute,' replied the clerk and instantly shut his little window.
'Funny! ' thought Vassily Stepanovich. This was the first time in his
life that he had been treated like this. We all know how hard it is to
acquire money--the process is strewn with obstacles ; but in his thirty
years' experience Vassily Stepanovich had never yet found anyone who had
made the least objection to taking money when offered it.
At last the window was pushed open again and the accountant leaned
forward again.
'How much have you got? ' asked the clerk.
'Twenty-one thousand, seven hundred and eleven roubles.'
'Oho! ' replied the clerk ironically and handed Vassily Stepanovich a
green form. Thoroughly familiar with it, he filled it out in a moment and
began untying the string on his package. As he unpacked it a red film came
over his eyes and he groaned in agony. In front of him lay heaps of foreign

money--Canadian dollars, English pounds, Dutch guilders, Latvian latts,
Esthonian crowns . . .
'Here's another of these jokers from the Variety! ' said a grim voice
behind the accountant. And Vassily Stepanovich was immediately put under
arrest.

18. Unwelcome Visitors

Just as Vassily Stepanovich was taking a taxi-ride to meet the suit
that wrote by itself, among the passengers from the Kiev express a
respectably dressed man carrying a little fibre suitcase emerged from a
first-class sleeper on to the Moscow platform. This passenger was none other
than the uncle of the late Misha Berlioz, Maximilian Andreyevich Poplavsky,
an economist who worked in the Planning Commission and lived in Kiev. The
cause of his arrival in Moscow was a telegram that he had received late in
the evening two days earlier:
have been run over BY TRAM AT PATRIARCHS FUNERAL THREE O'CLOCK FRIDAY
PLEASE COME BERLIOZ
Maximilian Andreyevich was regarded, and rightly so, as one of the most
intelligent men in Kiev, but a telegram like this would be liable to put
even the brightest of us in a dilemma. If a man telegraphs that he has been
run over, obviously he has not been killed. But then why the funeral? Or is
he so desperately ill that he can foresee his own death? It is possible, but
extremely odd to be quite so precise--even if he can predict his death, how
does he know that he's going to be buried at three o'clock on Friday? What
an astonishing telegram!
Intelligent people, however, become intelligent by solving complicated
problems. It was very simple. There had been a mistake and the wire had
arrived in garbled form. Obviously the word ' have ' belonged to some other
telegram and had been transmitted in error instead of the word ' Berlioz ',
which had been put by mistake at the end of the telegram. Thus corrected,
the meaning was quite clear, though, of course, tragic.
When his wife had recovered from her first grief, Maximilian
Andreyevich at once prepared to go to Moscow.
Here I should reveal a secret about Maximilian Andreyevich. He
genuinely mourned the death of his wife's cousin, cut off in the prime of
life, but at the same time, being a practical man, he fully realised that
there was no special need for his presence at the funeral. Yet Maximilian
Andreyevich was in a great hurry to go to Moscow. What for? For one
thing--the flat. A flat in Moscow was a serious matter. He did not know why,
but Maximilian Andreyevich did not like Kiev and the thought of moving to
Moscow had lately begun to nag at him with such insistence that it was
affecting his sleep.
He took no delight in the spring floods of the Dnieper when, as it
drowned the islands on the lower shore, the water spread until it merged
with the horizon. He found no pleasure in the staggeringly beautiful view
from the foot of the monument to Prince Vladimir. The patches of sunlight
that play in spring over the brick pathways leading to the top of St
Vladimir's hill meant nothing to him. He wanted none of it. He only wanted
to go to Moscow.
Advertisements in the newspapers offering to exchange a flat on
University Street in Kiev for a smaller flat in Moscow produced no results.
Nobody could be found who wanted to move, except a few whose offers turned
out to be fraudulent.

The telegram came as a shock to Maximilian Andreyevich. It was a chance
that would be sinful to miss. Practical people know that opportunities of
that sort never come twice.
In short he had to make sure, at no matter what cost, that he inherited
his nephew's flat in Sadovaya Street. It was going to be complicated, very
complicated, but come what might these complications had to be overcome. An
experienced man, Maximilian Andreyevich knew that the first and essential
step was to arrange a temporary residence permit to stay, for however short
a time, in his late nephew's flat.
So on Friday morning Maximilian Andreyevich walked into the office of
the Tenants' Association of No. 502A, Sadovaya Street, Moscow. In a mean
little room, its wall enlivened by a poster showing in several graphic
diagrams how to revive a drowned man, behind a wooden desk there sat a
lonely, unshaven middle-aged man with a worried look.
'May I see the chairman, please? ' enquired the economist politely,
taking off his hat and placing his attache case on a chair by the door. This
apparently simple question upset the man behind the desk so much that a
complete change came over his expression. Squinting with anxiety he muttered
something incoherent about the chairman not being there.
'Is he in his flat?' asked Poplavsky. ' I have some very urgent
business with him.'
The man gave another indistinct mumble, which meant that he wasn't in
his flat either. ' When will he be back? '
To this the seated man gave no reply except to stare glumly out of the
window.
'Aha! ' said the intelligent Poplavsky to himself and enquired after
the secretary. At this the strange man behind the desk actually went purple
in the face with strain and again muttered vaguely that the secretary wasn't
there either . . . nobody knew when he'd be back again . . . the secretary
was ill ...
'Oho! ' said Poplavsky to himself. ' Is there anybody here from the
Association's management committee? '
'Me,' said the man in a weak voice.
'Look,' said Poplavsky ingratiatingly, ' I am the sole heir of my
nephew Berlioz who as you know died the other day at Patriarch's Ponds and
according to law I have to claim my inheritance. All his things are in our
flat--No. 50 . . .'
'I don't know anything about it, comrade,' the man interrupted
gloomily.' Excuse me,' said Poplavsky in his most charming voice, ' you are
a member of the management committee and you must . . .'
Just then a stranger came into the room. The man behind the desk went
pale.
'Are you Pyatnazhko of the management committee? ' said the stranger.
'Yes, I am,' said the seated man in a tiny voice.
The stranger whispered something to him and the man behind the desk,
now completely bewildered, got up and left Poplavsky entirely alone in the
empty committee room.
'What a nuisance! I should have seen the whole committee at once . .
.' thought Poplavsky with annoyance as he crossed the courtyard and hurried
towards flat No. 50.
He rang the bell, the door was opened and Maximilian Andrey-evich
walked into the semi-darkness of the hall. He was slightly surprised not to
be able to see who had opened the door to him ;
there was no one in the hall except an enormous black cat sitting on a
chair. Maximilian Andreyevich coughed and tapped his foot, at which the
study door opened and Koroviev came into the hall. Maximilian Andreyevich
gave him a polite but dignified bow and said:
'My name is Poplavsky. I am the uncle . . .'
But before he could finish Koroviev pulled a dirty handkerchief out of
his pocket, blew his nose and burst into tears.
'Of course, of course! ' said Koroviev, removing the handkerchief from
his face. ' I only had to see you to know who you were! ' He shook with
tears and began sobbing : ' Oh, what a tragedy! How could such a thing
happen? '

'Was he run over by a tram? ' asked Poplavsky in a whisper.
'Completely!' cried Koroviev, tears streaming past his pince-nez, '
Completely! I saw it happen. Can you believe it? Bang--his head was off,
scrunch--away went his right leg, scrunch--off came his left leg! What these
trams can do.' In his grief, Koroviev leaned his nose against the wall
beside the mirror and shook with sobs.
Berlioz's uncle was genuinely moved by the stranger's behaviour. '
There--and they say people have no feelings nowadays! ' he thought, feeling
his own eyes beginning to prick. At the same time, however, an uneasy
thought snaked across his mind that perhaps this man had already registered
himself in the flat; such things had been known to happen.
'Excuse me, but were you a friend of Misha's? ' he enquired, wiping
his dry left eye with his sleeve and studying the grief-stricken Koroviev
with his right eye. But Koroviev was sobbing so hard that he was inaudible
except for ' Scrunch and off it came! ' His weeping-fit over, Koroviev
finally unstuck himself from the wall and said :
'No, I can't bear it! I shall go and take three hundred drops of
valerian in ether...' Turning his tear-stained face to Poplavsky he added :
' Ah, these trams! '
'I beg your pardon, but did you send me a telegram? ' asked Maximilian
Andreyevich, racking his brains to think who this extraordinary weeping
creature might be.
'He sent it,' replied Koroviev, pointing to the cat. Poplavsky, his
eyes bulging, assumed that he had misheard. ' No, I can't face it any
longer,' went on Koroviev, sniffing. ' When I think of that wheel going over
his leg . . . each wheel weighs 360 pounds . . . scrunch! . . . I must go
and lie down, sleep is the only cure.' And he vanished from the hall.
The cat jumped down from the chair, stood up on its hind legs, put its
forelegs akimbo, opened its mouth and said :
'I sent the telegram. So what? '
Maximilian Andreyevich's head began to spin, his arms and legs gave way
so that he dropped his case and sat down in a chair facing the cat.
'Don't you understand Russian?' said the cat severely. ' What do you
want to know? ' Poplavsky was speechless.
'Passport! ' barked the cat and stretched out a fat paw. Completely
dumbfounded and blind to everything except the twin sparks in the cat's
eyes, Poplavsky pulled his passport out of his pocket like a dagger. The cat
picked up a pair of spectacles in thick black rims from the table under the
mirror, put them on its snout, which made it look even more imposing, and
took the passport from Poplavsky's shaking hand.
'I wonder--have I fainted or what? ' thought Poplavsky. From the
distance came the sound of Koroviev's blubbering, the hall was filled with
the smell of ether, valerian and some other nauseating abomination.
'Which department issued this passport?' asked the cat. There was no
answer.
'Department four hundred and twenty,' said the cat to itself, drawing
its paw across the passport which it was holding upside-down. ' Well, of
course! I know that department, they issue passports to anybody who comes
along. I wouldn't have given one to someone like you. Not on any account.
One look at your face and I'd have refused! ' The cat had worked itself up
into such a temper that it threw the passport to the ground. ' You may not
attend the funeral,' went on the cat in an official voice. ' Kindly go home
at once.' And it shouted towards the door : ' Azazello! '
At this a small, red-haired man limped into the hall. He had one yellow
fang, a wall eye and was wearing a black sweater with a knife stuck into a
leather belt. Feeling himself suffocating, Poplavsky stood up and staggered
back, clutching his heart.
'See him out, Azazello! ' ordered the cat and went out.
'Poplavsky,' said the fanged horror in a nasal whine, ' I hope you
understand?'
Poplavsky nodded.
'Go back to Kiev at once,' Azazello went on, ' stay at home as quiet
as a mouse and forget that you ever thought of getting a flat in Moscow. Got
it? '

The little man only came up to Poplavsky's shoulder, but he reduced him
to mortal terror with his fang, his knife and his wall-eyed squint and he
had an air of cool, calculating energy.
First he picked up the passport and handed it to Maximilian
Andreyevich, who took it with a limp hand. Then Azazello took the suitcase
in his left hand, flung open the front door with his right and taking
Berlioz's uncle by the arm led him out on to the landing. Poplavsky leaned
against the wall. Without a key Azazello opened the little suitcase, took
out of it an enormous roast chicken minus one leg wrapped in greaseproof
paper and put it on the floor. Then he pulled out two sets of clean
under-wear, a razor-strop, a book and a leather case and kicked them all
downstairs except the chicken. The empty suitcase followed it. It could be
heard crashing downstairs and to judge by the sound, the lid broke off as it
went.
Then the carrot-haired ruffian picked up the chicken by its leg and hit
Poplavsky a terrible blow across the neck with it, so violently that the
carcase flew apart leaving Azazello with the leg in his hand. ' Everything
was in a mess in the Oblonskys' house ' as Leo Tolstoy so truly put it, a
remark which applied exactly to the present situation. Everything was in a
mess for Poplavsky. A long spark of light flashed in front of him, then he
had a vision of a funeral procession on a May afternoon and Poplavsky fell
downstairs.
When he reached the landing he knocked a pane out of the window with
his foot and sat down on the step. A legless chicken rolled past him,
disintegrating as it went. On the upper landing Azazello devoured the
chicken-leg in a flash, stuffed the bone into his pocket, turned back into
the flat and slammed the door behind him.
From below there came the sound of a man's cautious steps coming
upstairs. Poplavsky ran down another flight and sat down on a little wooden
bench on the landing to draw breath.
A tiny little old man with a painfully sad face, wearing an
old-fashioned tussore suit and a straw boater with a green ribbon, came up
the stairs and stopped beside Poplavsky.
'Would you mind telling me, sir,' enquired the man in tussore sadly, '
where No. 50 might be? '
'Upstairs,' gasped Poplavsky.
'Thank you very much, sir,' said the little man as gloomily as before
and plodded upward, whilst Poplavsky stood up and walked on downstairs.
You may ask whether Maximilian Andreyevich hurried to the police to
complain about the ruffians who had handled him with such violence in broad
daylight. He most certainly did not. How could he walk into a police station
and say that a cat had been reading his passport and that a man in a sweater
armed with a knife . . .? No, Maximilian Andreyevich was altogether too
intelligent for that.
He had by now reached the ground floor and noticed just beside the main
door another little door, with a broken glass pane, leading into a storage
cupboard. Poplavsky put his passport into his pocket and hunted round for
the scattered contents of his suitcase. There was no trace of them. He was
amazed to notice how little this worried him. Another and rather intriguing
idea now occupied him--to stay and see what happened when the little old man
went into the sinister flat. Since he had asked the way to No. 50, he must
be going there for the first time and was heading straight for the clutches
of the gang that had moved into the flat. Something told Poplavsky that the
little man was going to come out of that flat again in quick time. Naturally
he had given up any idea of going to his nephew's funeral and there was
plenty of time before the train left for Kiev. The economist glanced round
and slipped into the cupboard.
Just then came the sound of a door closing upstairs. ' He's gone in . .
.' thought Poplavsky anxiously. It was damp and cold in the cupboard and it
smelled of mice and boots. Maximilian Andreyevich sat down on a log of wood
and decided to wait. He was in a good position to watch the staircase and
the doorway leading on to the courtyard.
However he had to wait longer than he had expected. The staircase
remained empty. At last the door on the fifth floor was heard shutting.

Poplavsky froze. Yes, those were his footsteps. ' He's coming down . . .' A
door opened one floor lower. The footsteps stopped. A woman's voice. A sad
man's voice--yes, that was him . . . saying something like ' Stop it, for
heaven's sake . . .' Poplavsky stuck his ear out through the broken pane and
caught the sound of a woman's laughter. Quick, bold steps coming downstairs
and a woman flashed past. She was carrying a green oilcloth bag and hurried
out into the courtyard. Then came the little man's footsteps again. ' That's
odd! He's going back into the flat again! Surely he's not one of the gang?
Yes, he's going back. They've opened the door upstairs again. Well, let's
wait a little longer and see . . .'
This time there was not long to wait. The sound of the door. Footsteps.
The footsteps stopped. A despairing cry. A cat miaowing. A patter of quick
footsteps coming down, down, down!
Poplavsky waited. Crossing himself and muttering the sad little man
rushed past, hatless, an insane look on his face, his bald head covered in
scratches, his trousers soaking wet. He began struggling with the door
handle, so terrified that he failed to see whether it opened inwards or
outwards, finally mastered it and flew out into the sunlit courtyard.
The experiment over and without a further thought for his dead nephew
or for his flat, trembling to think of the danger he had been through and
muttering, ' I see it all, I see it all!' Maximilian Andreyevich ran
outside. A few minutes later a trolley-bus was carrying the economist
towards the Kiev station.
While the economist had been lurking in the downstairs cupboard, the
little old man had been through a distressing experience. He was a barman at
the Variety Theatre and his name was Andrei Fokich Sokov. During the police
investigation at the theatre, Andrei Fokich had kept apart from it all and
the only thing noticeable about him was that he grew even sadder-looking
than usual. He also found out from Karpov, the usher, where the magician was
staying.
So, leaving the economist on the landing, the barman climbed up to the
fifth floor and rang the bell at No. 50.
The door was opened immediately, but the barman shuddered and staggered
back without going in. The door had been opened by a girl, completely naked
except for an indecent little lace apron, a white cap and a pair of little
gold slippers. She had a perfect figure and the only flaw in her looks was a
livid scar on her neck.
'Well, come on in, since you rang,' said the girl, giving the barman
an enticing look.
Andrei Fokich groaned, blinked and stepped into the hall, taking off
his hat. At that moment the telephone rang. The shameless maid put one foot
on a chair, lifted the receiver and said into it:
'Hullo!'
The barman did not know where to look and shifted from foot to foot,
thinking : ' These foreigners and their maids! Really, it's disgusting! ' To
save himself from being disgusted he stared the other way.
The large, dim hallway was full of strange objects and pieces of
clothing. A black cloak lined with fiery red was thrown over the back of a
chair, while a long sword with a shiny gold hilt lay on the console under
the mirror. Three swords with silver hilts stood in one corner as naturally
as if they had been umbrellas or walking sticks, and berets adorned with
eagles' plumes hung on the antlers of a stag's head.
'Yes,' said the girl into the telephone. ' I beg your pardon? Baron
Maigel? Very good, sir. Yes. The professor is in today. Yes, he'll be
delighted to see you. Yes, it's formal . . . Tails or dinner jacket. When?
At midnight.' The conversation over, she put back the receiver and turned to
the barman.
'What do you want? '
'I have to see the magician.'
'What, the professor himself? '
'Yes,' replied the barman miserably.
'I'll see,' said the maid, hesitating, then she opened the door into
Berlioz's study and announced: ' Sir, there's a little man here. He says he
has to see messire in person.'

'Show him in,' said Koroviev's cracked voice from the study.
'Go in, please,' said the girl as naturally as if she had been
normally dressed, then opened the door and left the hall.
As he walked in the barman was so amazed at the furnishing of the room
that he forgot why he had come. Through the stained-glass windows (a fantasy
of the jeweller's widow) poured a strange ecclesiastical light. Although the
day was hot there was a log fire in the vast old-fashioned fireplace, yet it
gave no heat and instead the visitor felt a wave of damp and cold as though
he had walked into a tomb. In front of the fireplace sat a great black
tomcat on a tiger-skin rug blinking pleasurably at the fire. There was a
table, the sight of which made the God-fearing barman shudder--it was
covered with an altar-cloth and on top of it was an army of
bottles--bulbous, covered in mould and dust. Among the bottles glittered a
plate, obviously of solid gold. By the fireplace a little red-haired man
with a knife in his belt was roasting a piece of meat on the end of a long
steel blade. The fat dripped into the flames and the smoke curled up the
chimney. There was a smell of roasting meat, another powerful scent and the
odour of incense, which made the barman wonder, as he had read of Berlioz's
death and knew that this had been his flat, whether they were performing
some kind of requiem for the dead man, but as soon as it came to him he
abandoned the idea as clearly ridiculous.
Suddenly the stupefied barman heard a deep bass voice :
'Well sir, and what can I do for you? '
Andrei Fokich turned round and saw the man he was looking for.
The black magician was lolling on a vast, low, cushion-strewn divan. As
far as the barman could see the professor was wearing nothing but black
underwear and black slippers with pointed toes.
'I am,' said the little man bitterly, ' the head barman at the Variety
Theatre.'
The professor stretched out a hand glittering with precious stones as
though to stop the barman's mouth and interrupted heatedly:
'No, no, no! Not another word! Never, on any account! I shall never
eat or drink a single mouthful at that buffet of yours! I went past your
counter the other day, my dear sir, and I shall never forget the sight of
that smoked sturgeon and that cheese! My dear fellow, cheese isn't supposed
to be green, you know-- someone must have given you the wrong idea. It's
meant to be white. And the tea! It's more like washing-up water. With my own
eyes I saw a slut of a girl pouring grey water into your enormous samovar
while you went on serving tea from it. No, my dear fellow, that's not the
way to do it! '
'I'm sorry,' said Andrei Fokich, appalled by this sudden attack, ' but
I came about something else, I don't want to talk about the smoked sturgeon
. . .'
'But I insist on talking about it--it was stale!'
'The sturgeon they sent was second-grade-fresh,' said the barman.
'Really, what nonsense!'
'Why nonsense? '
'" Second-grade-fresh "--that's what I call nonsense! There's only one
degree of freshness--the first, and it's the last. If your sturgeon is "
second-grade-fresh " that means it's stale.'
'I'm sorry . . .' began the barman, at a loss to parry this insistent
critic.
'No, it's unforgivable,' said the professor.
'I didn't come to see you about that,' said the barman again, now
utterly confused.
'Didn't you? ' said the magician, astonished. ' What did you come for
then? As far as I remember I've never known anybody connected with your
profession, except for a vivandiere, but that was long before your time.
However, I'm delighted to make your acquaintance. A2a2ello! A stool for the
head barman! '
The man who was roasting meat turned round, terrifying the barman at
the sight of his wall eye, and neatly offered him one of the dark oaken
stools. There were no other seats in the room.
The barman said : ' Thank you very much,' and sat down on the stool.

One of its back legs immediately broke with a crash and the barman, with a
groan, fell painfully backward onto the :floor. As he fell he kicked the leg
of another stool and upset a full glass of red wine all over his trousers.
The professor exclaimed:
'Oh! Clumsy!'
Azazello helped the barman to get up and gave him another stool. In a
miserable voice the barman declined his host's offer to take off his
trousers and dry them in front of the fire. Feeling unbearably awkward in
his wet trousers and underpants, he took a cautious seat on the other stool.
'I love a low seat,' began the professor. ' One's not so likely to
fall. Ah, yes, we were talking about sturgeon. First and last, my dear
fellow, it must be fresh, fresh, fresh! That should be the motto of every
man in your trade. Oh yes, would you like to taste . . .'
In the red glow of the fire a sword glittered in front of the barman,
and Azazello laid a sizzling piece of meat on a gold plate, sprinkled it
with lemon juice and handed the barman a golden two-pronged fork.
'Thank you, but I . . .'
'No, do taste it! '
Out of politeness the barman put a little piece into his mouth and
found that he was chewing something really fresh and unusually delicious. As
he ate the succulent meat, however, he almost fell off his stool again. A
huge dark bird flew in from the next room and softly brushed the top of the
barman's bald head with its wing. As it perched on the mantelpiece beside a
clock, he saw that the bird was an owl. ' Oh my God! ' thought Andrei
Fokich, nervous as all barmen are, ' what a place!'
'Glass of wine? White or red? What sort of wine do you like at this
time of day? '
'Thanks but... I don't drink . . .'
'You poor fellow! What about a game of dice then? Or do you prefer
some other game? Dominoes? Cards? '
'I don't play,' replied the barman, feeling weak and thoroughly
muddled.
'How dreadful for you,' said the host. ' I always think, present
company excepted of course, that there's something unpleasant lurking in
people who avoid drinking, gambling, table-talk and pretty women. People
like that are either sick or secretly hate their fellow-men. Of course there
may be exceptions. I have had some outright scoundrels sitting at my table
before now! Now tell me what I can do for you.'
'Yesterday you did some tricks . . .'
'I did? Tricks? ' exclaimed the magician indignantly. ' I beg your
pardon! What a rude suggestion! '
'I'm sorry,' said the barman in consternation. ' I mean . . . black
magic ... at the theatre.'
'Oh, that! Yes, of course. I'll tell you a secret, my dear fellow. I'm
not really a magician at all. I simply wanted to see some Muscovites en
masse and the easiest way to do so was in a theatre. So my staff'--he nodded
towards the cat--'arranged this little act and I just sat on stage and
watched the audience. Now, if that doesn't shock you too much, tell me what
brings you here in connection with my performance? '
'During your act you made bank-notes float down from the ceiling. . .
.' The barman lowered his voice and looked round in embarrassment. ' Well,
all the audience picked them up and a young man came to my bar and handed me
a ten-rouble note, so I gave him eight roubles fifty change . . . Then
another one came . . .'
'Another young man? '
'No, he was older. Then there was a third and a fourth ... I gave them
all change. And today when I came to check the till there was nothing in it
but a lot of strips of paper. The bar was a hundred and nine roubles short.'
'Oh dear, dear, dear! ' exclaimed the professor. ' Don't tell me
people thought those notes were real? I can't believe they did it on
purpose.'
The barman merely stared miserably round him and said nothing.
'They weren't swindlers, were they? ' the magician asked in a worried
voice. ' Surely there aren't any swindlers here in Moscow?'

The barman replied with such a bitter smile that there could be no
doubt about it: there were plenty of swindlers in Moscow.
'That's mean! ' said Woland indignantly. ' You're a poor man . . . you
are a poor man, aren't you? '
Andrei Fokich hunched his head into his shoulders to show that he was a
poor man.
'How much have you managed to save? '
Although the question was put in a sympathetic voice, it was tactless.
The barman squirmed.
'Two hundred and forty nine thousand roubles in five different savings
banks,' said a quavering voice from the next room, ' and under the floor at
home he's got two hundred gold ten-rouble pieces.'
Andrei Fokich seemed to sink into his stool.
'Well, of course, that's no great sum of money,' said Woland
patronisingly. ' All the same, you don't need it. When are you going to die?
'
Now it was the barman's turn to be indignant.
'Nobody knows and it's nobody's business,' he replied.
'Yes, nobody knows,' said the same horrible voice from the next room.
' But by Newton's binomial theorem I predict that he will die in nine
months' time in February of next year of cancer of the liver, in Ward No. 4
of the First Moscow City Hospital.'
The barman's face turned yellow.
'Nine months . . .' Woland calculated thoughtfully. ' Two hundred and
forty-nine thousand . . . that works out at twenty-seven thousand a month in
round figures . . . not much, but enough for a man of modest habits . . .
then there are the gold coins . . .'
'The coins will not be cashed,' said the same voice, turning Andrei
Fokich's heart to ice. ' When he dies the house will be demolished and the
coins will be impounded by the State Bank.'
'If I were you I shouldn't bother to go into hospital,' went on the
professor. ' What's the use of dying in a ward surrounded by a lot of
groaning and croaking incurables? Wouldn't it be much better to throw a
party with that twenty-seven thousand and take poison and depart for the
other world to the sound of violins, surrounded by lovely drunken girls and
happy friends? '
The barman sat motionless. He had aged. Black rings encircled his eyes,
his cheeks were sunken, his lower jaw sagged.
'But we're daydreaming,' exclaimed the host. ' To business! Show me
those strips of paper.'
Fumbling, Andrei Fokich took a package out of his pocket, untied it and
sat petrified--the sheet of newspaper was full of ten-rouble notes.
'My dear chap, you really are sick,' said Woland, shrugging his
shoulders.
Grinning stupidly, the barman got up from his stool. ' B-b-but . . .'
he stammered, hiccupping, ' if they vanish again . . . what then? '
'H'm,' said the professor thoughtfully. ' In that case come back and
see us. Delighted to have met you. . . .'
At this Koroviev leaped out of the study, clasped the barman's hand and
shook it violently as he begged Andrei Fokich to give his kindest regards to
everybody at the theatre. Bewildered, Andrei Fokich stumbled out into the
hall. ' Hella, see him out! ' shouted Koroviev. The same naked girl appeared
in the hall. The barman staggered out, just able to squeak ' Goodbye ', and
left the flat as though he were drunk. Having gone a little way down, he
stopped, sat down on a step, took out the package and checked-- the money
was still there.
Just then a woman with a green bag came out of one of the flats on that
landing. Seeing a man sitting on the step and staring dumbly at a packet of
bank-notes, she smiled and said wistfully:
'What a dump this is ... drunks on the staircase at this hour of the
morning . . . and they've smashed a window on the staircase again! '
After a closer look at Andrei Fokich she added :
'Mind the rats don't get all that money of yours. . . . Wouldn't you
like to share some of it with me? '

'Leave me alone, for Christ's sake! ' said the barman and promptly hid
the money.
The woman laughed.
'Oh, go to hell, you old miser! I was only joking. . . .' And she went
on downstairs.
Andrei Fokich slowly got up, raised his hand to straighten his hat and
discovered that it was not on his head. He desperately wanted not to go
back, but he missed his hat. After some hesitation he made up his mind, went
back and rang the bell.
'What do you want now? ' asked Hella.
'I forgot my hat,' whispered the barman, tapping his bald head. Hella
turned round and the little man shut his eyes in horror. When he opened
them, Hella was offering him his hat and a sword with a black hilt.
'It's not mine. . . .' whispered the barman, pushing away the sword
and quickly putting on his hat.
'Surely you didn't come without a sword?' asked Hella in surprise.
Andrei Fokich muttered something and hurried off downstairs. His head
felt uncomfortable and somehow too hot. He took off his hat and gave a
squeak of horror--he was holding a velvet beret with a bedraggled cock's
feather. The barman crossed himself. At that moment the beret gave a miaou
and changed into a black kitten. It jumped on to Andrei Fokich's head and
dug its claws into his bald patch. Letting out a shriek of despair, the
wretched man hurled himself downstairs as the kitten jumped off his head and
flashed back to No. 50.
Bursting out into the courtyard, the barman trotted out of the gate and
left the diabolical No.50 for ever.
It was not, however, the end of his adventures. Once in the street he
stared wildly round as if looking for something. A minute later he was in a
chemist's shop on the far side of the road. No sooner had he said :
'Tell me, please . . .' when the woman behind the counter shrieked:
'Look! Your head! It's cut to pieces!'
Within five minutes Andrei's head was bandaged and he had discovered
that the two best specialists in diseases of the liver were Professor
Bernadsky and Professor Kuzmin. Enquiring which was the nearest, he was
overjoyed to learn that Kuzmin lived literally round the corner in a little
white house and two minutes later he was there.
It was an old-fashioned but very comfortable little house. Afterwards
the barman remembered first meeting a little old woman who wanted to take
his hat, but since he had no hat the old woman hobbled off, chewing her
toothless gums. In her place appeared a middle-aged woman, who immediately
announced that new patients could only be registered on the 19th of the
month and not before. Instinct told Andrei Fokich what to do. Giving an
expiring glance at the three people in the waiting-room he whispered:
'I'm dying. . . .'
The woman glanced uncertainly at his bandaged head, hesitated, then
said:
'Very well. . . .' and led the barman through the hall.
At that moment a door opened to reveal a bright gold pince-nez. The
woman in the white overall said :
'Citizens, this patient has priority.'
Andrei Fokich had not time to look round before he found himself in
Professor Kuzmin's consulting room. It was a long, well-proportioned room
with nothing frightening, solemn or medical about it.
'What is your trouble?' enquired Professor Kuzmin in a pleasant voice,
glancing slightly anxiously at the bandaged head.' I have just learned from
a reliable source,' answered the barman, staring wildly at a framed group
photograph, ' that I am going to die next February from cancer of the liver.
You must do something to stop it.'
Professor Kuzmin sat down and leaned against the tall leather back of
his Gothic chair.
'I'm sorry I don't understand you . . . You mean . . . you saw a
doctor? Why is your head bandaged? '
'Him? He's no doctor . . .' replied the barman and suddenly his teeth
began to chatter. ' Don't bother about my head, that's got nothing to do

with it... I haven't come about my head . . . I've got cancer of the
liver--you must do something about it!'
'But who told you? '
'You must believe him! ' Andrei Fokich begged fervently. ' He knows! '
'I simply don't understand,' said the professor, shrugging his
shoulders and pushing his chair back from the desk. ' How can he know when
you're going to die? Especially as he's not a doctor.'
'In Ward No. 4,' was all the barman could say. The professor stared at
his patient, at his head, at his damp trousers, and thought: ' This is the
last straw--some madman . . .' He asked :
'Do you drink? ' ' Never touch it,' answered the barman.
In a minute he was undressed and lying on a chilly striped couch with
the professor kneading his stomach. This cheered the barman considerably.
The professor declared categorically that at the present moment at least
there were no signs of cancer, but since . . . since he was worried about it
and some charlatan had given him a fright, he had better have some tests
done.
The professor scribbled on some sheets of paper, explaining where
Andrei Fokich was to go and what he should take with him. He also gave him a
note to a colleague, Professor Burye, the neuropathologist, saying that his
nerves, at any rate, were in a shocking condition.
'How much should I pay you, professor? ' asked the barman in a
trembling voice, pulling out a fat notecase. ' As much as you like,' replied
the professor drily. Andrei Fokich pulled out thirty roubles and put them on
the table, then furtively, as though his hands were cat's paws, put a round,
chinking, newspaper-wrapped pile on top of the ten-rouble notes.
'What's that?' asked Kuzmin, twirling one end of his moustache.
'Don't be squeamish, professor,' whispered the barman. ' You can have
anything you want if you'll stop my cancer.'
'Take your gold,' said the professor, feeling proud of himself as he
said it. ' You'd be putting it to better use if you spent it on having your
nerves treated. Produce a specimen of urine for analysis tomorrow, don't
drink too much tea and don't eat any salt in your food.'
'Can't I even put salt in my soup? ' asked the barman. ' Don't put
salt in anything,' said Kuzmin firmly. ' Oh dear . . .' exclaimed the barman
gloomily, as he gazed imploringly at the professor, picked up his parcel of
gold coins and shuffled backwards to the door.
The professor did not have many patients that evening and as twilight
began to set in, the last one was gone. Taking off his white overall, the
professor glanced at the place on the desk where Andrei Fokich had left the
three ten-rouble notes and saw that there were no longer any bank-notes
there, but three old champagne bottle labels instead.
'Well, I'm damned! ' muttered Kuzmin, trailing the hem of his overall
across the floor and fingering the pieces of paper. ' Apparently he's not
only a schizophrenic but a crook as well. But what can he have wanted out of
me? Surely not a chit for a urine test? Ah! Perhaps he stole my overcoat! '
The professor dashed into the hall, dragging his overall by one sleeve. '
Xenia Nikitishna! ' he screamed in the hall. ' Will you look and see if my
overcoat's in the cupboard? '
It was. But when the professor returned to his desk having finally
taken off his overall, he stopped as though rooted to the parquet, staring
at the desk. Where the labels had been there now sat a black kitten with a
pathetically unhappy little face, miaowing over a saucer of milk.
'What is going on here? This is . . .' And Kuzmin felt a chill run up
his spine.
Hearing the professor's plaintive cry, Xenia Nikitishna came running in
and immediately calmed him by saying that the kitten had obviously been
abandoned there by one of the patients, a thing they were sometimes prone to
do.
'I expect they're poor,' explained Xenia Nikitishna, ' whereas we . .
.'
They tried to guess who might have left the animal there. Suspicion
fell on an old woman with a gastric ulcer.
'Yes, it must be her,' said Xenia Nikitishna. ' She'll have thought to

herself: I'm going to die anyway, but it's hard on the poor little kitty.'
'Just a moment! ' cried Kuzmin. ' What about the milk? Did she bring
the milk? And the saucer too? '
'She must have had a saucer and a bottle of milk in her bag and poured
it out here,' explained Xenia Nikitishna.
'At any rate remove the kitten and the saucer, please,' said Kuzmin
and accompanied Xenia Nikitishna to the door.
As he hung up his overall the professor heard laughter from the
courtyard. He looked round and hurried over to the window. A woman, wearing
nothing but a shirt, was running across the courtyard to the house opposite.
The professor knew her-- she was called Marya Alexandrovna. A boy was
laughing at her.
'Really, what behaviour,' said Kuzmin contemptuously. Just then the
sound of a gramophone playing a foxtrot came from his daughter's room and at
the same moment the professor heard the chirp of a sparrow behind his back.
He turned round and saw a large sparrow hopping about on his desk.
'H'm . . . steady now! ' thought the professor. ' It must have flown
in when I walked over to the window. I'm quite all right! ' said the
professor to himself severely, feeling that he was all wrong, thanks to this
intruding sparrow. As he looked at it closer, the professor at once realised
that it was no ordinary sparrow. The revolting bird was leaning over on its
left leg, making faces, waving its other leg in syncopation--in short it was
dancing a foxtrot in time to the gramophone, cavorting like a drunk round a
lamppost and staring cheekily at the professor.
Kuzmin's hand was on the telephone and he was just about to ring up his
old college friend Burye and ask him what it meant to start seeing sparrows
at sixty, especially if they made your head spin at the same time.
Meanwhile the sparrow had perched on his presentation inkstand, fouled
it, then flew up, hung in the air and dived with shattering force at a
photograph showing the whole class of '94 on graduation day, smashing the
glass to smithereens. The bird then wheeled smartly and flew out of the
window.
The professor changed his mind and instead of ringing up Burye dialled
the number of the Leech Bureau and asked them to send a leech to his house
at once. Replacing the receiver on the rest, the professor turned back to
his desk and let out a wail. On the far side of the desk sat a woman in
nurse's uniform with a bag marked ' Leeches '. The sight of her mouth made
the professor groan again--it was a wide, crooked, man's mouth with a fang
sticking out of it. The nurse's eyes seemed completely dead.
'I'll take the money,' said the nurse, ' it's no good to you now.' She
grasped the labels with a bird-like claw and began to melt into the air.
Two hours passed. Professor Kuzmin was sitting up in bed with leeches
dangling from his temples, his ears and his neck. At his feet on the
buttoned quilt sat the grey-haired Professor Burye, gazing sympathetically
at Kuzmin and comforting him by assuring him that it was all nonsense.
Outside it was night.
We do not know what other marvels happened in Moscow that night and we
shall not, of course, try to find out--especially as the time is approaching
to move into the second half of this true story. Follow me, reader!

* BOOK TWO *

19. Margarita

Follow me, reader! Who told you that there is no such thing as real,
true, eternal love? Cut out his lying tongue!
Follow me, reader, and only me and I will show you that love!
The master was wrong when he told Ivan with such bitterness, in the

hospital that hour before midnight, that she had forgotten him. It was
impossible. Of course she had not forgotten him.
First let us reveal the secret that the master refused to tell Ivan.
His beloved mistress was called Margarita Nikolayevna. Everything the master
said about her to the wretched poet was the strict truth. She was beautiful
and clever. It is also true that many women would have given anything to
change places with Margarita Nikolayevna. Thirty years old and childless,
Margarita was married to a brilliant scientist, whose work was of national
importance. Her husband was young, handsome, kind, honest and he adored his
wife. Margarita Nikolayevna and her husband lived alone in the whole of the
top floor of a delightful house in a garden in one of the side streets near
the Arbat. It was a charming place. You can see for yourself whenever you
feel like having a look. Just ask me and I'll tell you the address and how
to get there ; the house is standing to this day.
Margarita Nikolayevna was never short of money. She could buy whatever
she liked. Her husband had plenty of interesting friends. Margarita never
had to cook. Margarita knew nothing of the horrors of living in a shared
flat. In short . . . was she happy? Not for a moment. Since the age of
nineteen when she had married and moved into her house she had never been
happy. Ye gods! What more did the woman need? Why did her eyes always glow
with a strange fire? What else did she want, that witch with a very slight
squint in one eye, who always decked herself with mimosa every spring? I
don't know. Obviously she was right when she said she needed him, the
master, instead of a Gothic house, instead of a private garden, instead of
money. She was right--she loved him.
Even I, the truthful narrator, yet a mere onlooker, feel a pain when I
think what Margarita went through when she came back to the master's
basement the next day (fortunately she had not been able to talk to her
husband, who failed to come home at the time arranged) and found that the
master was not there. She did everything she could to discover where he
might be, but in vain. T'hen she returned home and took up her old life.
But when the dirty snow disappeared from the roads and pavements, as
soon as the raw, liv.e wind of spring blew in through the upper casement,
Margarita Nikolayevna felt even more wa-etched than in winter. She often
wept in secret, long and bitterly. She had no idea whether her lover was
dead or alive. The longer the hopeless days marched on, the oftener,
especially at twilight, she began to suspect that her man was dead. Slie
must either forget him o:r die herself. Her present existence was
intolerable. She had to forget him at all costs. But unfortunately he was
not a man one could forget.
'Yes, I made exactly the same mistake,' said Margarita, sitting by the
stove and watching the fire, lit in memory of the fire that used to burn
while he was writing about Pontius Pilate. ' Why did I leave him that night?
Why? I imust have been mad. I came back the' next day just as I had
promised, but it was too late. Yes, I ca-me too late like poor Matthew the
Levite!'
All this, of course, was nonsense, because what would have been changed
if she had stayed with the master that night? Would she have saved him? The
idea's absurd . . . but she was a woman- and she was desperate.
On the same day that witnessed the ridiculous scandal caused by the
black magician's appearance in Moscow, that Friday when Berlioz's uncle was
sent packing back to Kiev, when the accountant was arrested and a host of
other weird and improbable events took place, Margarita woke up around
midday in her bedroom, that looked out of an attic window of their top-floor
flat.
Waking, Margarita did not burst into tears, as she frequently did,
because she had woken up with a presentiment that today, at last, something
was going to happen. She kept the feeling warm and encouraged it, afraid
that it might leave her.
'I believe it! ' whispered Margarita solemnly. ' I believe something
is going to happen, must happen, because what have I done to be made to
suffer all my life? I admit I've lied and been unfaithful and lived a secret
life, but even that doesn't deserve such a cruel punishment . . . something
will happen, because a situation like this can't drag on for ever. Besides,

my dream was prophetic, that I'll swear. . . .'
With a sense of unease Margarita Nikolayevna dressed and brushed her
short curly hair in front of her triple dressing-table mirror.
The dream that Margarita had dreamed that night had been most unusual.
Throughout her agony of the past winter she had never dreamed of the master.
At night he left her and it was only during the day that her memory
tormented her. And now she had dreamed of him.
Margarita had dreamed of a place, mournful, desolate under a dull sky
of early spring. The sky was leaden, with tufts of low, scudding grey cloud
and filled with a numberless flock of rooks. There was a little hump-backed
bridge over a muddy, swollen stream ; joyless, beggarly, half-naked trees. A
lone aspen, and in the distance, past a vegetable garden stood a log cabin
that looked like a kind of outhouse. The surroundings looked so lifeless and
miserable that one might easily have been tempted to hang oneself on that
aspen by the little bridge. Not a breath of wind, not a cloud, not a living
soul. In short--hell. Suddenly the door of this hut was flung open and he
appeared in it, at a fair distance but clearly visible. He was dressed in
some vague, slightly tattered garment, hair in untidy tufts, unshaven. His
eyes looked anxious and sick. He waved and called. Panting in the lifeless
air, Margarita started running towards him over the uneven, tussocky ground.
At that moment she woke up.
'That dream can only mean one of two things,' Margarita Nikolayevna
reasoned with herself, ' if he is dead and beckoned me that means that he
came for me and I shall die soon. If so, I'm glad; that means that my agony
will soon be over. Or if he's alive, the dream can only mean that he is
reminding me of himself. He wants to tell me that we shall meet again . . .
yes, we shall meet again--soon.'
Still in a state of excitement, Margarita dressed, telling herself that
everything was working out very well, that one should know how to seize such
moments and make use of them. Her husband had gone away on business for
three whole days. She was left to herself for three days and no one was
going to stop her thinking or dreaming of whatever she wished. All five
rooms on the top floor of the house, a flat so big that tens of thousands of
people in Moscow would have envied her, was entirely at her disposal.
Yet free as she was for three days in such luxurious quarters,
Margarita chose the oddest part of it in which to spend her time. After a
cup of tea she went into their dark, windowless attic where they kept the
trunks, the lumber and two large chests of drawers full of old junk.
Squatting down she opened the bottom drawer of the first chest and from
beneath a pile of odds and ends of material she drew out the one thing which
she valued most of all. It was an old album bound in brown leather, which
contained a photograph of the master, a savings bank book with a deposit of
ten thousand roubles in his name, a few dried rose petals pressed between
some pieces of cigarette paper and several sheets of typescript with singed
edges.
Returning to her bedroom with this treasure, Margarita Nikolayevna
propped up the photograph against her dressing-table mirror and sat for
about an hour, the burnt typescript on her knees, turning the pages and
re-reading what the fire had not destroyed: '. . . The mist that came from
the Mediterranean
sea blotted out the city that Pilate so detested. The suspension
bridges connecting the temple with the grim fortress of Antonia vanished,
the murk descended from the sky and drowned the winged gods above the
hippodrome, the crenellated Hasmonaean palace, the bazaars, the
caravanserai, the alleyways, the pools . . . Jerusalem, the great city,
vanished as though it had never been. . ..'
Margarita wanted to read on, but there was nothing more except the
charred, uneven edge.
Wiping away her tears, Margarita Nikolayevna put down the script,
leaned her elbows on the dressing-table and sat for a long rime in front of
her reflection in the mirror staring at the photograph. After a while she
stopped crying. Margarita carefully folded away her hoard, a few minutes
later it was buried again under the scraps of silk and the lock shut with a
click in the dark room.

Margarita put on her overcoat in the hall to go out for a walk. Her
pretty maid Natasha enquired what she was to do tomorrow and being told that
she could do what she liked, she started talking to her mistress to pass the
time and mentioned something vague about a magician who had done such
fantastic tricks in the theatre yesterday that everybody had gasped, that he
had handed out two bottles of French perfume and two pairs of stockings to
everybody for nothing and then, when the show was over and the audience was
coming out--bang!--they were all naked! Margarita Nikolayevna collapsed on
to the hall chair and burst out laughing.
'Natasha, really! Aren't you ashamed of yourself? ' said Margarita. '
You're a sensible, educated girl . . . and you repeat every bit of rubbishy
gossip that you pick up in queues! '
Natasha blushed and objected hotly, saying that she never listened to
queue gossip and that she had actually seen a woman that morning come into a
delicatessen on the Arbat wearing some new shoes and while she was standing
at the cash desk to pay, her shoes had vanished and she was left standing in
her stockinged feet. She looked horrified, because she had a hole in the
heel of one stocking! The shoes were the magic ones that she had got at the
show.
'And she walked out barefoot? '
'Yes, she did! ' cried Natasha, turning even pinker because no one
would believe her. ' And yesterday evening, Margarita Nikolayevna, the
police arrested a hundred people. Some of the women who'd been at the show
were running along the Tver-skaya in nothing but a pair of panties.'
'That sounds to me like one of your friend Darya's stories,' said
Margarita Nikolayevna. ' I've always thought she was a frightful liar.'
This hilarious conversation ended with a pleasant surprise for Natasha.
Margarita Nikolayevna went into her bedroom and came out with a pair of
stockings and a bottle of eau-de-cologne. Saying to Natasha that she wanted
to do a magic trick too, Margarita gave her the stockings and the scent; she
told her that she could have them on one condition--that she promised not to
run along the Tverskaya in nothing but stockings and not to listen to
Darya's gossip. With a kiss mistress and maid parted.
Leaning back on her comfortable upholstered seat in the trolley-bus,
Margarita Nikolayevna rolled along the Arbat, thinking of her own affairs
and half-listening to what two men on the seat in front were whispering.
Glancing round occasionally for fear of being overheard, they seemed to be
talking complete nonsense. One, a plump, hearty man with sharp pig-like
eyes, who was sitting by the window, was quietly telling his smaller
neighbour how they had been forced to cover the open coffin with a black
cloth . . .
'Incredible! ' whispered the little one in amazement. ' It's
unheard-of! So what did Zheldybin do? '
Above the steady hum of the trolley-bus came the reply from the window
seat:
'Police . . . scandal . . . absolute mystery!'
Somehow Margarita Nikolayevna managed to construct a fairly coherent
story from these snatches of talk. The men were whispering that someone had
stolen the head of a corpse (they did not mention the dead man's name) from
a coffin that morning. This, apparently, was the cause of Zheldybin's
anxiety and the two men whispering in the trolley-bus also appeared to have
some connection with the victim of this ghoulish burglary.
'Shall we have time to buy some flowers? ' enquired the smaller man
anxiously. ' You said the cremation was at two o'clock, didn't you? '
In the end Margarita Nikolayevna grew bored with their mysterious
whispering about the stolen head and she was glad when it was time for her
to get out.
A few minutes later she was sitting under the Kremlin wall on one of
the benches in the Alexander Gardens facing the Manege. Margarita squinted
in the bright sunlight, recalling her dream and she remembered that exactly
a year ago to the hour she had sat on this same bench beside him. Just as it
had then, her black handbag lay on the bench at her side. Although the
master was not there this time, Margarita Nikolayevna carried on a mental
conversation with him : ' If you've been sent into exile why haven't you at

least written to tell me? Don't you love me any more? No, somehow I don't
believe that. In that case you have died in exile ...' If you have, please
release me, let me go free to lead my life like other people! ' Margarita
answered for him : ' You're free . . . I'm not keeping you by force.' Then
she replied: ' What sort of an answer is that? I won't be free until I stop
thinking of you . . .'
People were walking past. One man gave a sideways glance at this
well-dressed woman. Attracted by seeing a pretty girl alone, he coughed and
sat down on Margarita Nikolayevna's half of the bench. Plucking up his
courage he said :
'What lovely weather it is today . . .'
Margarita turned and gave him such a grim look that he got up and went
away.
'That's what I mean,' said Margarita silently to her lover. ' Why did
I chase that man away? I'm bored, there was nothing wrong with that
Casanova, except perhaps for his highly unoriginal remark . . . Why do I sit
here alone like an owl? Why am I cut off from life? '
She had worked herself into a state of complete depression, when
suddenly the same wave of urgent expectancy that she had felt that morning
overcame her again. ' Yes, something's going to happen! ' The wave struck
her again and she then realised that it was a wave of sound. Above the noise
of traffic there clearly came the sound of approaching drum-beats and the
braying of some off-key trumpets.
First to pass the park railings was a mounted policeman, followed by
three more on foot. Next came the band on a lorry, then a slow-moving open
hearse carrying a coffin banked with wreaths and a guard of honour of four
people--three men and a woman. Even from a distance Margarita could see that
the members of the guard of honour looked curiously distraught. This was
particularly noticeable in the woman, who was standing at the left-hand rear
corner of the hearse. Her fat cheeks seemed to be more than normally puffed
out by some secret joke and her protuberant little eyes shone with a
curiously ambiguous sparkle. It was as if the woman was liable at any moment
to wink at the corpse and say ' Did you ever see such a thing? Stealing a
dead man's head . . .! ' The three hundred-odd mourners, who were slowly
following the cortege on foot, looked equally mystified.
Margarita watched the cortege go by, listening to the mournful beat of
the kettle-drum as its monotonous ' boom, boom, boom' slowly faded away and
she thought: ' What a strange funeral . . . and how sad that drum sounds!
I'd sell my soul to the devil to know whether he's alive or not ... I wonder
who that odd-looking crowd is going to bury? '
'Mikhail Alexandrovich Berlioz,' said a slightly nasal man's voice
beside her, ' the late chairman of MASSOLIT.'
Margarita Nikolayevna turned in astonishment and saw a man on her bench
who must have sat down noiselessly while she had been watching the funeral
procession. Presumably she had absentmindedly spoken her last question
aloud. Meanwhile the procession had stopped, apparently held up by the
traffic lights.
1 Yes,' the stranger went on, ' it's an odd sort of funeral. They're
carrying the man off to the cemetery in the usual way but all they can think
about is--what's happened to his head? '
'Whose head? ' asked Margarita, glancing at her unexpected neighbour.
He was short, with fiery red hair and one protruding fang, wearing a
starched shirt, a good striped suit, patent-leather shoes and a bowler hat.
His tie was bright. One strange feature was his breast pocket: instead of
the usual handkerchief or fountain pen, it contained a gnawed chicken bone.
'This morning,' explained the red-haired man, ' the head was pulled
off the dead man's body during the lying-in-state at Griboyedov.'
'How ever could that have happened? ' asked Margarita, suddenly
remembering the two whispering men in the trolley-bus.
'Devil knows how,' said the man vaguely. ' I suspect Behemoth might be
able to tell you. It must have been a neat job, but why bother to steal a
head? After all, who on earth would want it?
Preoccupied though she was, Margarita Nikolayevna could not help being
intrigued by this stranger's extraordinary conversation.

'Just a minute! ' she suddenly exclaimed. ' Who is Berlioz? Is he the
one in the newspapers today who . . .'
'Yes, yes.'
'So those were writers in the guard of honour round the coffin? '
enquired Margarita, suddenly baring her teeth.
'Yes, of course . . .'
'Do you know them by sight? '
'Every one,' the man replied.
'Tell me,' said Margarita, her voice dropping, ' is one of them a
critic by the name of Latunsky? '
'How could he fail to be there? ' answered the man with red hair. '
That's him, on the far side of the fourth rank.'
'The one with fair hair? ' asked Margarita, frowning.
'Ash-blond. Look, he's staring up at the sky.'
'Looking rather like a Catholic priest? '
'That's him!'
Margarita asked no more questions but stared hard at Latunsky.
'You, I see,' said the stranger with a smile, ' hate that man
Latunsky. ' Yes, and someone else too,' said Margarita between clenched
teeth, ' but I'd rather not talk about it.'
Meanwhile the procession had moved on again, the mourners being
followed by a number of mostly empty cars.
'Then we won't discuss it, Margarita Nikolayevna!'
Astounded, Margarita said:
'Do you know me? '
Instead of replying the man took off his bowler hat and held it in his
outstretched hand.
'A face like a crook,' thought Margarita, as she stared at him.
'But I don't know you,' she said frigidly.
'Why should you? However, I have been sent on a little matter that
concerns you.'
Margarita paled and edged away. ' Why didn't you say so at once,' she
said, ' instead of making up that fairy tale about a stolen head? Have you
come to arrest me? '
'Nothing of the sort! ' exclaimed the man with red hair. ' Why does
one only have to speak to a person for them to imagine they're going to be
arrested? I simply have a little matter to discuss with you.'
'I don't understand--what matter? '
The stranger glanced round and said mysteriously :
'I have been sent to give you an invitation for this evening.'
'What are you talking about? What invitation? '
'You are invited by a very distinguished foreign gentleman,' said the
red-haired man portentously, with a frown.
Margarita blazed with anger.
'I see that pimps work in the streets now! ' she said as she got up to
go.
'Is that all the thanks I get? ' exclaimed the man, offended. And he
growled at Margarita's retreating back :
'Stupid bitch! '
'Swine! ' she flung back at him over her shoulder.
Immediately she heard the stranger's voice behind her:
'The mist that came from the Mediterranean sea blotted out the city
that Pilate so detested. The suspension bridges connecting the temple with
the grim fortress of Antonia vanished, the murk descended from the sky and
drowned the winged gods above the hippodrome, the crenellated Hasmonaean
palace, the bazaars, the caravansera.1, the alleyways, the pools. . . .
Jerusalem, the great city, vanished as though it had never been. ... So much
for your charred manuscript and your dried rose petals! Yet you sit here
alone on a bench and beg him to let you go, to allow you to be free and to
forget him! '
White in the face, Margarita turned back to the bench. The man sat
frowning at her.
'I don't understand, it,' said Margarita Nikolayevna in a hushed
voice. ' You might have found out about the manuscript . . . you might have

broken in, stolen it, looked at it ... I suppose you bribed Natasha. But how
could you know what I was thinking? ' She -wrinkled her brow painfully and
added ' Tell me, who are you? What organisation do you belong to? '
'Oh, lord, not that. . .' muttered the stranger in exasperation. In a
louder voice he said : 'I'm sorry. As I said, I have not come to arrest you
and I don't belong to any " organisation." Please sit down.'
Margarita obediently did as she was told, but once seated could not
help asking again :
'Who are you? '
'Well if you must know my name is Azazello, although it won't mean
anything to you.'
'And won't you tell me how you knew about the manuscript and how you
read my thoughts? '
'I will not,' said Azazello curtly.
'Do you know anything about him? ' whispered Margarita imploringly.
'Well, let's say I do.'
'Tell me, I beg of you, just one thing--is he alive? Don't torture me!
'
'Yes, he's alive all rig:ht,' said Azazello reluctantly.
'Oh, God!'
'No scenes, please,' said Azazello with a frown.
'I'm sorry, I'm sorry,' said Margarita humbly. ' I'm sorry I lost my
temper with you. But you must admit that if someone comes up to a woman in
the street and invites her ... I have no prejudices, I assure you.'
Margarita laughed mirthlessly. ' But I never meet foreigners and I have
never wanted to ... besides that, my husband ... my tragedy is that I live
with a man I don't love . . . but I can't bring myself to ruin his life ...
he has never shown me anything but kindness . . .'
Azazello listened to this incoherent confession and said severely:
'Please be quiet for a moment.'
Margarita obediently stopped talking.
'My invitation to this foreigner is quite harmless. And not a soul
will know about it. That I swear.'
'And what does he want me for? ' asked Margarita insinuatingly.
'You will discover that later.'
'I see now ... I am to go to bed with him,' said Margarita
thoughtfully.
To this Azazello snorted and replied:
'Any woman in the world, I can assure you, would give anything to do
so '--his face twisted with a laugh--' but I must disappoint you. He doesn't
want you for that.'
'Who is this foreigner? ' exclaimed Margarita in perplexity, so loudly
that several passers-by turned to look at her. ' And why should I want to go
and see him? '
Azazello leaned towards her and whispered meaningly :
'For the best possible reason ... you can use the opportunity...'
'What? ' cried Margarita, her eyes growing round. ' If I've understood
you correctly, you're hinting that I may hear some news of him there? '
Azazello nodded silently.
'I'll go!' Margarita burst out and seized Azazello by the arm. ' I'll
go wherever you like i ' With a sigh of relief Azazello leaned against the
back of the bench, covering up the name ' Manya ' carved deep into its wood,
and said ironically : ' Difficult people, these woman! ' He stuck his hands
into his pockets and stretched his feet out far in front of him. ' Why did
he have to send me on this job? Behemoth should have done it, he's got such
charm . . .'
W^ith a bitter smile Margarita said :
'Stop mystifying me and talking in riddles. I'm happy and you're
making use of it ... I may be about to let myself in for some dubious
adventure, but I swear it's only because you have enticed me by talking
about him! All this mystery is making my head spin . . .'
'Please don't make a drama out of it,' replied Azazello with a
grimace. ' Think of what it's like being in my position. Punch a man on the
nose, kick an old man downstairs, shoot somebody or any old thing like that,

that's my job. But argue with women in love--no thank you! Look, I've been
at it with you for half an hour now . . . Are you going or not? '
'I'll go,' replied Margarita Nikolayevna simply.
'In that case allow me to present you with this,' said Azazello,
taking a little round gold box out of his pocket and saying as he handed it
to Margarita : ' Hide it, or people will see it. It will do you good,
Margarita Nikolayevna; unhappiness has aged you a lot in the last six
months--' Margarita bridled but said nothing, and Azazello went on : ' This
evening, at exactly half past eight, you will kindly strip naked and rub
this ointment all over your face and your body. After that you can do what
you like, but don't go far from the telephone. At nine I shall ring you up
and tell you what you have to do. You won't have to worry about anything,
you'll be taken to where you're going and nothing will be done to upset you.
Understood? '
Margarita said nothing for a moment, then replied :
'I understand. This thing is solid gold, I can tell by its weight. I
quite see that I am being seduced into something shady which I shall
bitterly regret. . .'
'What's that? ' Azazello almost hissed. ' You're not having second
thoughts are you? '
'No, no, wait!'
'Give me back the cream! '
Margarita gripped the box tighter and went on:
'No, please wait ... I know what I'm letting myself in for. I'm ready
to go anywhere and do anything for his sake, only because I have no more
hope left. But if you are planning to ruin or destroy me, you will regret
it. Because if I die for his sake I shall have died out of love.'
'Give it back!' shouted Azazello in fury. ' Give it back and to hell
with the whole business. They can send Behemoth! '
'Oh, no!' cried Margarita to the astonishment of the passers-by. ' I
agree to everything, I'll go through the whole pantomime of smearing on the
ointment, I'll go to the ends of the earth! I won't give it back! '
'Bah! ' Azazello suddenly roared and staring at the park railings,
pointed at something with his finger.
Margarita turned in the direction that he was pointing, but saw nothing
in particular. Then she turned to Azazello for some explanation of his
absurd cry of ' Bah! ', but there was no one to explain : Margarita
Nikolayevna's mysterious companion had vanished.
Margarita felt in her handbag and made sure that the gold box was still
where she had put it. Then without stopping to reflect she hurried away from
the Alexander Gardens.

20. Azazello's Cream

Through the branches of the maple tree a full moon hung in the clear
evening sky. The limes and acacias traced a complex pattern of shadows on
the grass. A triple casement window in the attic, open but with the blind
drawn, shone with a glare of electric light. Every lamp was burning in
Margarita Nikolayevna's bedroom and lighting up the chaotically untidy room.
On the bedspread lay blouses, stockings and underwear, more crumpled
underwear was piled on the floor beside a packet of cigarettes that had been
squashed in the excitement. A pair of slippers was on the bedside table
alongside a cold, unfinished cup of coffee and an ashtray with a smouldering
cigarette end. A black silk dress hung across the chairback. The room
smelled of perfume and from somewhere there came the reek of a hot iron.
Margarita Nikolayevna was sitting in front of a full-length mirror in
nothing but black velvet slippers, a bath-wrap thrown over her naked body.
Her gold wrist-watch lay in front of her alongside the little box given her

by Azazello, and Margarita was staring at the watch-face.
At times she felt that the watch had broken and the hands were not
moving. They were moving, but so slowly that they seemed to have stuck. At
last the minute hand pointed to twenty nine minutes past eight. Margarita's
heart was thumping so violently that at first she could hardly pick up the
box. With an effort she opened it and saw that it contained a greasy
yellowish cream. It seemed to smell of swamp mud. With the tip of her finger
Margarita put a little blob of the cream on her palm, which produced an even
stronger smell of marsh and forest, and then she began to massage the cream
into her forehead and cheeks.
The ointment rubbed in easily and produced an immediate tingling
effect. After several rubs Margarita looked into the mirror and dropped the
box right on to the watch-glass, which shivered into a web of fine cracks.
Margarita shut her eyes, then looked again and burst into hoots of laughter.
Her eyebrows that she had so carefully plucked into a fine line had
thickened into two regular arcs above her eyes, which had taken on a deeper
green colour. The fine vertical furrow between her eyebrows which had first
appeared in October when the master disappeared, had vanished without trace.
Gone too were the yellowish shadows at her temples and two barely detectable
sets of crowsfeet round the corners of her eyes. The skin of her cheeks was
evenly suffused with pink, her brow had become white and smooth and the
frizzy, artificial wave in her hair had straightened out.
A dark, naturally curly-haired woman of twenty, teeth bared and
laughing uncontrollably, was looking out of the mirror at the
thirty-year-old Margarita.
Laughing, Margarita jumped out of her bath-wrap with one leap, scooped
out two large handfuls of the slightly fatty cream and began rubbing it
vigorously all over her body. She immediately glowed and turned a healthy
pink. In a moment her headache stopped, after having pained her all day
since the encounter in the Alexander Gardens. The muscles of her arms and
legs grew firmer and she even lost weight.
She jumped and stayed suspended in the air just above the carpet, then
slowly and gently dropped back to the ground.
'Hurray for the cream! ' cried Margarita, throwing herself into an
armchair.
The anointing had not only changed her appearance. Joy surged through
every part of her body, she felt as though bubbles were shooting along every
limb. Margarita felt free, free of everything, realising with absolute
clarity that what was happening was the fulfilment of her presentiment of
that morning, that she was going to leave her house and her past life for
ever. But one thought from her past life hammered persistently in her mind
and she knew that she had one last duty to perform before she took off into
the unknown, into the air. Naked as she was she ran out of the bedroom,
flying through the air, and into her husband's study, where she turned on
the light and flew to his desk. She tore a sheet off his note-pad and in one
sweep, erasing nothing and changing nothing, she quickly and firmly
pencilled this message :Forgive me and forget me as quickly as you can. I am
leaving you for ever. Don't look for me, it will be useless. Misery and
unhappiness have turned me into a witch. It is time for me to go. Farewell.
Margarita.
With a sense of absolute relief Margarita flew back into the bedroom.
Just then Natasha came in, loaded with clothes and shoes. At once the whole
pile, dresses on coathangers, lace blouses, blue silk shoes on shoe trees,
belts, all fell on to the floor and Natasha clasped her hands.
'Pretty, aren't I?' cried Margarita Nikolayevna in a loud, slightly
husky voice.
'What's happened?' whispered Natasha, staggering back. ' What have you
done, Margarita Nikolayevna? '
'It's the cream! The cream!' replied Margarita, pointing to the
gleaming gold box and twirling round in front of the mirror. Forgetting the
heap of crumpled clothes on the floor, Natasha ran to the dressing table and
stared, eyes hot with longing, at the remains of the ointment. Her lips
whispered a few words in silence. She turned to Margarita and said with
something like awe:

'Oh, your skin--look at your skin, Margarita Nikolayevna, it's
shining! ' Then she suddenly remembered herself, picked up the dress she had
dropped and started to smooth it out.
'Leave it, Natasha! Drop it! ' Margarita shouted at her. ' To hell
with it! Throw it all away! No--wait--you can have it all. As a present from
me. You can have everything there is in the room!'
Dumbfounded, Natasha gazed at Margarita for a while then clasped her
round the neck, kissing her and shouting :
'You're like satin! Shiny satin! And look at your eyebrows!'
'Take all these rags, take all my scent and put it all in your bottom
drawer, you can keep it,' shouted Margarita, ' but don't take the jewellery
or they'll say you stole it.'
Natasha rummaged in the heap for whatever she could pick up--stockings,
shoes, dresses and underwear--and ran out of the bedroom.
At that moment from an open window on the other side of the street came
the loud strains of a waltz and the spluttering of a car engine as it drew
up at the gate.
'Azazello will ring soon! ' cried Margarita, listening to the sound of
the waltz. ' He's going to ring! And this foreigner is harmless, I realise
now that he can never harm me!'
The car's engine roared as it accelerated away. The gate slammed and
footsteps could be heard on the flagged path.
'It's Nikolai Ivanovich, I recognise his tread,' thought Margarita. '
I must do something funny as a way of saying goodbye to him!'
Margarita flung the shutters open and sat sideways on the windowsill,
clasping her knees with her hands. The moonlight caressed her right side.
Margarita raised her head towards the moon and put on a reflective and
poetic face. Two more footsteps were heard and then they suddenly stopped.
With another admiring glance at the moon and a sigh for fun, Margarita
turned to look down at the garden, where she saw her neighbour of the floor
below, Nikolai Ivanovich. He was clearly visible in the moonlight, sitting
on a bench on which he had obviously just sat down with a bump. His
pince-nez was lop-sided and he was clutching his briefcase in his arms.
'Hullo, Nikolai Ivanovich! ' said Margarita Nikolayevna in a sad
voice. ' Good evening! Have you just come from the office?'
Nikolai Ivanovich said nothing.
'And here am I,' Margarita went on, leaning further out into the
garden, ' sitting all alone as you can see, bored, looking at the moon and
listening to a waltz . . .'
Margarita Nikolayevna ran her left hand along her temple, arranging a
lock of hair, then said crossly :
'It's very impolite of you, Nikolai Ivanovich! I am a woman, after
all! It's rude not to answer when someone speaks to you.'
Nikolai Ivanovich, visible in the bright moonlight down to the last
button on his grey waistcoat and the last hair on his little pointed beard,
suddenly gave an idiotic grin and got up from his bench. Obviously
half-crazed with embarrassment, instead of taking off his hat he waved his
briefcase and flexed his knees as though just about to break into a Russian
dance.
'Oh how you bore me, Nikolai Ivanovich! ' Margarita went on. ' You all
bore me inexpressibly and I can't tell you how happy I am to be leaving you!
You can all go to hell!'
Just then the telephone rang in Margarita's bedroom. She slipped off
the windowsill and forgetting Nikolai Ivanovich completely she snatched up
the receiver.
'Azazello speaking,' said a voice.
'Dear, dear Azazello,' cried Margarita.
'It's time for you to fly away,' said Azazello and she could hear from
his tone that he was pleased by Margarita's sincere outburst of affection. '
As you fly over the gate shout " I'm invisible "--then fly about over the
town a bit to get used to it and then turn south, away from Moscow straight
along the river. They're waiting for you! '
Margarita hung up and at once something wooden in the next room started
bumping about and tapping on the door. Margarita flung it open and a broom,

bristles upward, danced into the bedroom. Its handle beat a tattoo on the
floor, tipped itself up horizontally and pointed towards the window.
Margarita whimpered with joy and jumped astride the broomstick. Only then
did she remember that in the excitement she had forgotten to get dressed.
She galloped over to the bed and picked up the first thing to hand, which
was a blue slip. Waving it like a banner she flew out of the window. The
waltz rose to a crescendo.
Margarita dived down from the window and saw Nikolai Ivanovich sitting
on the bench. He seemed to be frozen to it, listening stunned to the shouts
and bangs that had been coming from the top-floor bedroom.
'Goodbye, Nikolai Ivanovich! ' cried Margarita, dancing about in front
of him.
The wretched man groaned, fidgeted and dropped his briefcase.
'Farewell for ever, Nikolai Ivanovich! I'm flying away! ' shouted
Margarita, drowning the music of the waltz. Realising that her slip was
useless she gave a malicious laugh and threw it over Nikolai Ivanovich's
head. Blinded, Nikolai Ivanovich fell off the bench on to the flagged path
with a crash.
Margarita turned round for a last look at the house where she had spent
so many years of unhappiness and saw the astonished face of Natasha in the
lighted window.
'Goodbye, Natasha! ' Margarita shouted, waving her broom. ' I'm
invisible! Invisible! ' she shouted at the top of her voice as she flew off,
the maple branches whipping her face, over the gate and out into the street.
Behind her flew the strains of the waltz, rising to a mad crescendo.

21. The Flight

Invisible and free! Reaching the end of her street, Margarita turned
sharp right and flew on down a long, crooked street with its plane trees and
its patched roadway, its oil-shop with a warped door where they sold
kerosene by the jugful and the bottled juice of parasites. Here Margarita
discovered that although she was invisible, free as air and thoroughly
enjoying herself, she still had to take care. Stopping herself by a miracle
she just avoided a lethal collison with an old, crooked lamp-post. As she
swerved away from it, Margarita gripped her broomstick harder and flew on
more slowly, glancing at the passing signboards and electric cables.
The next street led straight to the Arbat. By now she had thoroughly
mastered the business of steering her broom, having found that it answered
to the slightest touch of her hands or legs and that when flying around the
town she had to be very careful to avoid collisions. It was now quite
obvious that the people in the street could not see her. Nobody turned their
head, nobody shouted' Look, look! ', nobody stepped aside, nobody screamed,
fell in a faint or burst into laughter.
Margarita flew silently and very slowly at about second-storey height.
Slow as her progress was, however, she made slightly too wide a sweep as she
flew into the blindingly-lit Arbat and hit her shoulder against an
illuminated glass traffic sign. This annoyed her. She stopped the obedient
broomstick, flew back, aimed for the sign and with a sudden flick of the end
of her broom, smashed it to fragments. The pieces crashed to the ground,
passers-by jumped aside, a whistle blew and Margarita burst into laughter at
her little act of wanton destruction.
'I shall have to be even more careful on the Arbat,' she thought to
herself. ' There are so many obstructions, it's like a maze.' She began
weaving between the cables. Beneath her flowed the roofs of trolley-buses,
buses and cars, and rivers of hats surged along the pavements. Little

streams diverged from these rivers and trickled into the lighted caves of
all-night stores.
'What a maze,' thought Margarita crossly. ' There's no room to
manoeuvre here! '
She crossed the Arbat, climbed to fourth-floor height, past the
brilliant neon tubes of a corner theatre and turned into a narrow
side-street flanked with tall houses. All their windows were open and radio
music poured out from all sides. Out of curiosity Margarita glanced into one
of them. She saw a kitchen. Two Primuses were roaring away on a marble
ledge, attended by two women standing with spoons in their hands and
swearing at each other.
'You should put the light out when you come out of the lavatory, I've
told you before, Pelagea Petrovna,' said the woman with a saucepan of some
steaming decoction, ' otherwise we'll have you chucked out of here.'
'You can't talk,' replied the other.
'You're both as bad as each other,' said Margarita clearly, leaning
over the windowsill into the kitchen.
The two quarrelling women stopped at the sound of her voice and stood
petrified, clutching their dirty spoons. Margarita carefully stretched out
her arm between them and turned off both primuses. The women gasped. But
Margarita was already bored with this prank and had flown out again into the
street.
Her attention was caught by a massive and obviously newly-built
eight-storey block of flats at the far end of the street. Margarita flew
towards it and as she landed she saw that the building was faced with black
marble, that its doors were wide, that a porter in gold-laced peaked cap and
buttons stood in the hall. Over the doorway was a gold inscription reading '
Dramlit House'.
Margarita frowned at the inscription, wondering what the word '
Dramlit' could mean. Tucking her broomstick under her arm, Margarita pushed
open the front door, to the amazement of the porter, walked in and saw a
huge black notice-board that listed the names and flat numbers of all the
residents. The inscription over the name-board, reading ' Drama and
Literature House,' made Margarita give a suppressed yelp of predatory
anticipation. Rising a little in the air, she began eagerly to read the
names: Khustov, Dvubratsky, Quant, Beskudnikov, Latunsky . . .
'Latunsky!' yelped Margarita. ' Latunsky! He's the man . . . who
ruined the master!'
The porter jumped up in astonishment and stared at the name-board,
wondering why it had suddenly given a shriek.
Margarita was already flying upstairs, excitedly repeating :
'Latunsky, eighty-four . . . Latunsky, eighty-four . . . Here we are,
left--eighty-two, right--eighty-three, another floor up, left--eighty-four!
Here it is and there's his name--" 0. Latunsky ".'
Margarita jumped off her broomstick and the cold stone floor of the
landing felt pleasantly cool to her hot bare feet. She rang once, twice. No
answer. Margarita pressed the button harder and heard the bell ringing far
inside Latunsky's flat. Latunsky should have been grateful to his dying day
that the chairman of massolit had fallen under a tramcar and that the
memorial gathering was being held that very evening. Latunsky must have been
born under a lucky star, because the coincidence saved him from an encounter
with Margarita, newly turned witch that Friday.
No one came to open the door. At full speed Margarita flew down,
counting the floors as she went, reached the bottom, flew out into the
street and looked up. She counted the floors and tried to guess which of the
windows belonged to Latunsky's flat. Without a doubt they were the five
unlighted windows on the eighth floor at the corner of the building. Feeling
sure that she was right, Margarita flew up and a few seconds later found her
way through an open window into a dark room lit only by a silver patch of
moonlight. Margarita walked across and fumbled for the switch. Soon all the
lights in the flat were burning. Parking her broom in a corner and making
sure that nobody was at home, Margarita opened the front door and looked at
the nameplate. This was it.
People say that Latunsky still turns pale when he remembers that

evening and that he always pronounces Berlioz's name with gratitude. If he
had been at home God knows what violence might have been done that night.
Margarita went into the kitchen and came out with a massive hammer.
Naked and invisible, unable to restrain herself, her hands shook with
impatience. Margarita took careful aim and hit the keys of the grand piano,
sending a crashing discord echoing through the flat. The innocent piano, a
Backer baby grand, howled and sobbed. With the sound of a revolver shot, the
polished sounding-board split under a hammer-blow. Breathing hard, Margarita
smashed and battered the strings until she collapsed into an armchair to
rest.
An ominous sound of water came from the kitchen and the bathroom. ' It
must be overflowing by now . . .' thought Margarita and added aloud :
'But there's no time to sit and gloat.'
A flood was already pouring from the kitchen into the passage. Wading
barefoot, Margarita carried buckets of water into the critic's study, and
emptied them into the drawers of his desk. Then having smashed the
glass-fronted bookcase with a few hammer-blows, she ran into the bedroom.
There she shattered the mirror in the wardrobe door, pulled out all
Latunsky's suits and flung them into the bathtub. She found a large bottle
of ink in the study and poured its contents all over the huge, luxurious
double bed.
Although all this destruction was giving her the deepest pleasure, she
somehow felt that its total effect was inadequate and too easily repaired.
She grew wilder and more indiscriminate. In the room with the piano, she
smashed the flower vases and the pots holding rubber plants. With savage
delight she rushed into the bedroom with a cook's knife, slashed all the
sheets and broke the glass in the photograph frames. Far from feeling tired,
she wielded her weapon with such ferocity that the sweat poured in streams
down her naked body.
Meanwhile in No. 82, immediately beneath Latunsky's flat, Quant's maid
was drinking a cup of tea in the kitchen and wondering vaguely why there was
so much noise and running about upstairs. Looking up at the ceiling she
suddenly saw it change colour from white to a deathly grey-blue. The patch
spread visibly and it began to spout drops of water. The maid sat there for
a few minutes, bewildered at this phenomenon, until a regular shower began
raining down from the ceiling and pattering on the floor. She jumped up and
put a bowl under the stream, but it was useless as the shower was spreading
and was already pouring over the gas stove and the dresser. With a shriek
Quant's maid ran out of the flat on to the staircase and started ringing
Latunsky's front-door bell.
'Ah, somebody's ringing . . . time to go,' said Margarita. She mounted
the broom, listening to a woman's voice shouting through the keyhole.
'Open up, open up! Open the door, Dusya! Your water's overflowing!
We're being flooded! '
Margarita flew up a few feet and took a swing at the chandelier. Two
lamps broke and glass fragments flew everywhere. The shouts at the keyhole
had stopped and there was a tramp of boots on the staircase. Margarita
floated out of the window, where she turned and hit the glass a gentle blow
with her hammer. It shattered and cascaded in smithereens down the marble
facade on to the street below. Margarita flew on to the next window. Far
below people were running about on the pavement, and one of the cars
standing outside the entrance started up and drove away.
Having dealt with all Latunsky's windows, Margarita floated on towards
the next flat. The blows became more frequent, the street resounded with
bangs and tinkles. The porter ran out of the front door, looked up,
hesitated for a moment in amazement, popped a whistle into his mouth and
blew like a maniac. The noise inspired Margarita to even more violent action
on the eighth-floor windows and then to drop down a storey and to start work
on the seventh.
Bored by his idle job of hanging around the entrance hall, the porter
put all his pent-up energy into blowing his whistle, playing a woodwind
obbligato in time to Margarita's enthusiastic percussion. In the intervals
as she moved from window to window, he drew breath and then blew an
ear-splitting blast from distended cheeks at each stroke of Margarita's

hammer. Their combined efforts produced the most impressive results. Panic
broke out in Dramlit House. The remaining unbroken window-panes were flung
open, heads were popped out and instantly withdrawn, whilst open windows
were hastily shut. At the lighted windows of the building opposite appeared
figures, straining forward to try and see why for no reason all the windows
of Dramlit House were spontaneously exploding.
All along the street people began running towards Dramlit House and
inside it others were pelting senselessly up and down the staircase. The
Quants' maid shouted to them that they were being flooded out and she was
soon joined by the Khustovs' maid from No. 80 which lay underneath the
Quants'. Water was pouring through the Khustovs' ceiling into the bathroom
and the kitchen. Finally an enormous chunk of plaster crashed down from
Quants' kitchen ceiling, smashing all the dirty crockery on the
draining-board and letting loose a deluge as though someone upstairs were
pouring out buckets of dirty rubbish and lumps of sodden plaster. Meanwhile
a chorus of shouts came from the staircase.
Flying past the last window but one on the fourth floor, Margarita
glanced into it and saw a panic-stricken man putting on a gas mask.
Terrified at the sound of Margarita's hammer tapping on the window, he
vanished from the room. Suddenly the uproar stopped. Floating down to the
third floor Margarita looked into the far window, which was shaded by a
flimsy blind. The room was lit by a little night-light. In a cot with
basketwork sides sat a little boy of about four, listening nervously. There
were no grownups in the room and they had obviously all run out of the flat.
'Windows breaking,' said the little boy and cried : ' Mummy!'
Nobody answered and he said :
'Mummy, I'm frightened.'
Margarita pushed aside the blind and flew in at the window.
'I'm frightened,' said the little boy again, shivering.
'Don't be frightened, darling,' said Margarita, trying to soften her
now raucous, harsh voice. ' It's only some boys breaking windows.'
'With a catapult? ' asked the boy, as he stopped shivering.
'Yes, with a catapult,' agreed Margarita. ' Go to sleep now.'
'That's Fedya,' said the boy. ' He's got a catapult.'
'Of course, it must be Fedya.'
The boy glanced slyly to one side and asked :
'Where are you, aunty? '
'I'm nowhere,' replied Margarita. ' You're dreaming about me.
'I thought so,' said the little boy.
'Now you lie down,' said Margarita, ' put your hand under your cheek
and I'll send you to sleep.'
'All right,' agreed the boy and lay down at once with his cheek on his
palm.
'I'll tell you a story,' Margarita began, laying her hot hand on the
child's cropped head. ' Once upon a time there was a lady . . . she had no
children and she was never happy. At first she just used to cry, then one
day she felt very naughty . . .' Margarita stopped and took away her hand.
The little boy was asleep.
Margarita gently put the hammer on the windowsill and flew out of the
window. Below, disorder reigned. People were shouting and running up and
down the glass-strewn pavement, policemen among them. Suddenly a bell
started clanging and round the corner from the Arbat drove a red fire-engine
with an extending ladder.
Margarita had already lost interest. Steering her way past any cables,
she clutched the broom harder and in a moment was flying high above Dramlit
House. The street veered sideways and vanished. Beneath her now was only an
expanse of roofs, criss-crossed with brilliantly lit roads. Suddenly it all
slipped sideways, the strings of light grew blurred and vanished.
Margarita gave another jerk, at which the sea of roofs disappeared,
replaced below her by a sea of shimmering electric lights. Suddenly the sea
of light swung round to the vertical and appeared over Margarita's head
whilst the moon shone under her legs. Realising that she had looped the
loop, Margarita righted herself, turned round and saw that the sea had
vanished ; behind her there was now only a pink glow on the horizon. In a

second that too had disappeared and Margarita saw that she was alone with
the moon, sailing along above her and to the left. Margarita's hair streamed
out behind her in wisps as the moonlight swished past her body. From the two
lines of widely-spaced lights meeting at a point in the distance and from
the speed with which they were vanishing behind her Margarita guessed that
she was flying at prodigious speed and was surprised to discover that it did
not take her breath away.
After a few seconds' travel, far below in the earthbound blackness an
electric sunrise flared up and rolled beneath Margarita's feet, then twisted
round and vanished. Another few seconds, another burst of light.
'Towns! Towns!' shouted Margarita.
Two or tliree times she saw beneath her what looked like dull glinting
bands of steel ribbon that were rivers.
Glancing upward and to the left she stared at the moon as it flew past
her, rushing backwards to Moscow, yet strangely appearing to stand still. In
the moon she could clearly see a mysterious dark shape--not exactly a
dragon, not quite a little hump-backed horse, its sharp muzzle pointed
towards the city she was leaving.
The thought then came to Margarita that there was really no reason for
her to drive her broom at such a speed. She was missing a unique chance to
see the world from a new viewpoint and savour the thrill of flight.
Something told her that wherever her destination might be, her hosts would
wait for her.
There was no hurry, no reason to make herself dizzy with speed or to
fly at such a height, so she tilted the head other broom downwards and
floated, at a greatly reduced speed, almost down to ground level. This
headlong dive, as though on an aerial toboggan, gave her the utmost
pleasure. The earth rose up to her and the moonlit landscape, until then an
indistinguishable blur, was revealed in exquisite detail. Margarita flew
just above the veil of mist over meadow and pond ; through the wisps of
vapour she could hear the croaking of frogs, from the distance came the
heart-stopping moan of a train. Soon Margarita caught sight of it. It was
moving slowly, like a caterpillar blowing sparks from the top of its head.
She overtook it, crossed another lake in which a reflected moon swam beneath
her legs, then flew still lower, nearly brushing the tops of the giant pines
with her feet.
Suddenly Margarita caught the sound of heavy, snorting breath behind
her and it seemed to be slowly catching her up. Gradually another noise like
a flying bullet and a woman's raucous laughter could be heard. Margarita
looked round and saw that she was being followed by a dark object of curious
shape. As it drew nearer it began to look like someone flying astride, until
as it slowed down to draw alongside her Margarita saw clearly that it was
Natasha.
Completely naked too, her hair streaming behind her, she was flying
along mounted on a fat pig, clutching a briefcase in its front legs and
furiously pounding the air with its hind trotters. A pince-nez, which
occasionally flashed in the moonlight, had fallen off its nose and was
dangling on a ribbon, whilst the pig's hat kept falling forward over its
eyes. After a careful look Margarita recognised the pig as Nikolai Ivanovich
and her laughter rang out, mingled with Natasha's, over the forest below.
'Natasha! ' shrieked Margarita. ' Did you rub the cream on yourself?'
'Darling!' answered Natasha, waking the sleeping pine forests with her
screech. ' I smeared it on his bald head I '
'My princess! ' grunted the pig miserably.
'Darling Margarita Nikolayevna! ' shouted Natasha as she galloped
alongside. ' I confess--I took the rest of the cream. Why shouldn't I fly
away and live, too? Forgive me, but I could never come back to you now--not
for anything. This is the life for me! . .. He made me a
proposition.'--Natasha poked her finger into the back of the pig's neck--'
The old lecher. I didn't think he had it in him, did you? What did you call
me? ' she yelled, leaning down towards the pig's ear.
'Goddess! ' howled the animal. ' Slow down, Natasha, please! There are
important papers in my briefcase and I may lose them! '
'To hell with your papers,' shouted Natasha, laughing. ‘ Oh, please

don't shout like that, somebody may hear us!' roared the pig imploringly.
As she flew alongside Margarita, Natasha laughingly told her what had
happened in the house after Margarita Nikolayevna had flown away over the
gate.
Natasha confessed that without touching any more of the things she had
been given she had torn her clothes off, rushed to the cream and started to
anoint herself. The same transformation took place. Laughing aloud with
delight, she was standing in front of the mirror admiring her magical beauty
when the door opened and in walked Nikolai Ivanovich. He was highly excited
and was holding Margarita Nikolayevna's slip, his briefcase and his hat. At
first he was riveted to the spot with horror, then announced, as red as a
lobster, that he thought he should bring the garment back. . . .
'The things he said, the beast! ' screamed Natasha, roaring with
laughter. ' The things he suggested! The money he offered me! Said his wife
would never find out. It's true, isn't it?' Natasha shouted to the pig,
which could do nothing but wriggle its snout in embarrassment.
As they had romped about in the bedroom, Natasha smeared some of the
cream on Nikolai Ivanovich and then it was her turn to freeze with
astonishment. The face of her respectable neighbour shrank and grew a snout,
whilst his arms and legs sprouted trotters. Looking at himself in the mirror
Nikolai Ivanovich gave a wild, despairing squeal but it was too late. A few
seconds later, with Natasha astride him, he was flying through the air away
from Moscow, sobbing with chagrin.
'I demand to be turned back to my usual shape! ' the pig suddenly
grunted, half angry, half begging. ' I refuse to take part: in an illegal
assembly! Margarita Nikolayevna, kindly take your maid off my back.'
'Oh, so I'm a maid now, am I! What d'you mean--maid!' cried Natasha,
tweaking the pig's ear. ' I was a goddess just now! What did you call me? '
'Venus! ' replied the pig miserably, brushing a hazel-bush with its
feet as they flew low over a chattering, fast-flowing stream.
'Venus! Venus! ' screamed Natasha triumphantly, putting one arm akimbo
and waving the other towards the moon.
'Margarita! Queen Margarita! Ask them to let me stay a witch! You have
the power to ask for whatever you like and they'll do it for you.'
Margarita replied :
'Very well, I promise.'
'Thanks!' screamed Natasha, raising her voice still higher to shout: '
Hey, go on--faster, faster! Faster than that! '
She dug her heels into the pig's thin flanks, sending it flying
forward. In a moment Natasha could only be seen as a dark spot far ahead and
as she vanished altogether the swish of her passage through the air died
away.
Margarita flew on slowly through the unknown, deserted countryside,
over hills strewn with occasional rocks and sparsely grown with giant fir
trees. She was no longer flying over their tops, but between their trunks,
silvered on one side by the moonlight. Her faint shadow flitted ahead of
her, as the moon was now at her back.
Sensing that she was approaching water, Margarita guessed that her goal
was near. The fir trees parted and Margarita gently floated through the air
towards a chalky hillside. Below it lay a river. A mist was swirling round
the bushes growing on the cliff-face, whilst the opposite bank was low and
flat. There under a lone clump of trees was the flicker of a camp fire,
surrounded by moving figures, and Margarita seemed to hear the insistent
beat of music. Beyond, as far as the eye could see, there was not a sign of
life.
Margarita bounded down the hillside to the water, which looked tempting
after her chase through the air. Throwing aside the broom, she took a run
and dived head-first into the water. Her body, as light as air, plunged in
and threw up a column of spray almost to the moon. The water was as warm as
a bath and as she glided upwards from the bottom Margarita revelled in the
freedom of swimming alone in a river at night. There was no one near
Margarita in the water, but further away near some bushes by the shore, she
could hear splashing and snorting. Someone else was having a bathe.
Margarita swam ashore and ran up the bank. Her body tingled. She felt

no fatigue after her long flight and gave a little dance of pure joy on the
damp grass. Suddenly she stopped and listened. The snorting was moving
closer and from a clump of reeds there emerged a fat man, naked except for a
dented top hat perched on the back of his head. He had been plodding his way
through sticky mud, which made him seem to be wearing black boots. To judge
from his breath and his hiccups he had had a great deal to drink, which was
confirmed by a smell of brandy rising from the water around him.
Catching sight of Margarita the fat man stared at her, then cried with
a roar of joy:
'Surely it can't be! It is--Claudine, the merry widow! What brings you
here? ' He waddled forward to greet her. Margarita retreated and replied in
a dignified voice :
'Go to hell! What d'you mean--Claudine? Who d'you think you're talking
to?' After a moment's reflection she rounded off her retort with a long,
satisfying and unprintable obscenity. Its effect on the fat man was
instantly sobering.
'Oh dear,' he exclaimed, flinching. ' Forgive me--I didn't see you,
your majesty. Queen Margot. It's the fault of the brandy.' The fat man
dropped on to one knee, took off his top hat, bowed and in a mixture of
Russian and French jabbered some nonsense about having just come from a
wedding in Paris, about brandy and about how deeply he apologised for his
terrible mistake.
'You might have put your trousers on, you great fool,' said Margarita,
relenting though still pretending to be angry.
The fat man grinned with delight as he realised that Margarita had
forgiven him and he announced cheerfully that he just happened to be without
his trousers at this particular moment because he had absent-mindedly left
them on the bank of the river Yenisei where he had been bathing just before
flying here, but would go back for them at once. With an effusive volley of
farewells he began bowing and walking backwards, until he slipped and fell
headlong into the water. Even as he fell, however, his side-whiskered face
kept its smile of cheerful devotion. Then Margarita gave a piercing whistle,
mounted the obedient broomstick and flew across to the far bank, which lay
in the full moonlight beyond the shadow cast by the chalk cliff.
As soon as she touched the wet grass the music from the clump of
willows grew louder and the stream of sparks blazed upwards with furious
gaiety. Under the willow branches, hung with thick catkins, sat two rows of
fat-cheeked frogs, puffed up as if they were made of rubber and playing a
march on wooden pipes. Glow-worms hung on the willow twigs in front of the
musicians to light their sheets of music whilst a nickering glow from the
camp fire played over the frogs' faces.
The march was being played in Margarita's honour as part of a solemn
ceremony of welcome. Translucent water-sprites stopped their dance to wave
fronds at her as their cries of welcome floated across the broad
water-meadow. Naked witches jumped down from the willows and curtsied to
her. A goat-legged creature ran up, kissed her hand and, as he spread out a
silken sheet on the grass, enquired if she had enjoyed her bathe and whether
she would like to lie down and rest.
As Margarita lay down the goat-legged man brought her a goblet of
champagne, which at once warmed her heart. Asking where Natasha was, she was
told that Natasha had already bathed. She was already flying back to Moscow
on her pig to warn them that Margarita would soon be coming and to help in
preparing her attire.
Margarita's short stay in the willow-grove was marked by a curious
event: a whistle split the air and a dark body, obviously missing its
intended target, sailed through the air and landed in the water. A few
moments later Margarita was faced by the same fat man with side whiskers who
had so clumsily introduced himself earlier. He had obviously managed to fly
back to the Yenisei because although soaking wet from head to foot, he now
wore full evening dress. He had been at the brandy again, which had caused
him to land in the water, but as before his smile was indestructible and in
his bedraggled state he was permitted to kiss Margarita's hand.
All prepared to depart. The water-sprites ended their dance and
vanished. The goat-man politely asked how she had arrived at the river and

on hearing that she had ridden there on a broom he cried:
'Oh, how uncomfortable! ' In a moment he had twisted two branches into
the shape of a telephone and ordered someone to send a car at once, which
was done in a minute.
A brown open car flew down to the island. Instead of a driver the
chauffeur's seat was occupied by a black, long-beaked crow in a check cap
and gauntlets. The island emptied as the witches flew away in the moonlight,
the fire burned out and the glowing embers turned to grey ash.
The goat-man opened the door for Margarita, who sprawled on the car's
wide back seat. The car gave a roar, took off and climbed almost to the
moon. The island fell away, the river disappeared and Margarita was on her
way to Moscow.

22. By Candlelight

The steady hum of the car as it flew high above the earth lulled
Margarita to sleep and the moonlight felt pleasantly warm. Closing her eyes
she let the wind play on her face and thought wistfully of that strange
riverbank which she would probably never see again. After so much magic and
sorcery that evening she had already guessed who her host was to be, but she
felt quite unafraid. The hope that she might regain her happiness made her
fearless. In any case she was not given much time to loll in the car and
dream about happiness. The crow was a good driver and the car a fast one.
When Margarita opened her eyes she no longer saw dark forests beneath her
but the shimmering jewels of the lights of Moscow. The bird-chauffeur
unscrewed the right-hand front wheel as they flew along, then landed the car
at a deserted cemetery in the Dorogomilov district.
Opening the door to allow Margarita and her broom to alight on a
gravestone the crow gave the car a push and sent it rolling towards the
ravine beyond the far edge of the cemetery. It crashed over the side and was
shattered to pieces. The crow saluted politely, mounted the wheel and flew
away on it.
At that moment a black cloak appeared from behind a headstone. A wall
eye glistened in the moonlight and Margarita recognised Azazello. He
gestured to Margarita to mount her broomstick, leaped astride his own long
rapier, and they both took off and landed soon afterwards, unnoticed by a
soul, near No. 302A, Sadovaya Street.
As the two companions passed under the gateway into the courtyard,
Margarita noticed a man in cap and high boots, apparently waiting for
somebody. Light as their footsteps were, the lonely man heard them and
shifted uneasily, unable to see who it was.
At the entrance to staircase 6 they encountered a second man,
astonishingly similar in appearance to the first, and the same performance
was repeated. Footsteps . . . the man turned round uneasily and frowned.
When the door opened and closed he hurled himself in pursuit of the
invisible intruders and peered up the staircase but failed, of course, to
see anything. A third man, an exact copy of the other two, was lurking on
the third-floor landing. He was smoking a strong cigarette and Margarita
coughed as she walked past him. The smoker leaped up from his bench as
though stung, stared anxiously around, walked over to the banisters and
glanced down. Meanwhile Margarita and her companion had reached flat No. 50.
They did not ring, but Azazello silently opened the door with his key.
Margarita's first surprise on walking in was the darkness. It was as dark as
a cellar, so that she involuntarily clutched Azazello's cloak from fear of
an accident, but soon from high up and far away a lighted lamp flickered and
came closer. As they went Azazello took away Margarita's broom and it
vanished soundlessly into the darkness.
They then began to mount a broad staircase, so vast that to Margarita

it seemed endless. She was surprised that the hallway of an ordinary Moscow
flat could hold such an enormous, invisible but undeniably real and
apparently unending staircase. They reached a landing and stopped. The light
drew close and Margarita saw the face of the tall man in black holding the
lamp. Anybody unlucky enough to have crossed his path in those last few days
would have recognised him at once. It was Koroviev, alias Faggot.
His appearance, it is true, had greatly changed. The guttering flame
was no longer reflected in a shaky pince-nez long due for the dustbin, but
in an equally unsteady monocle. The moustaches on his insolent face were
curled and waxed. He appeared black for the simple reason that he was
wearing tails and black trousers. Only his shirt front was white.
Magician, choirmaster, wizard, or the devil knows what, Koroviev bowed
and with a broad sweep of his lamp invited Margarita to follow him. Azazello
vanished.
'How strange everything is this evening! ' thought Margarita. ' I was
ready for anything except this. Are they trying to save current, or what?
The oddest thing of all is the size of this place . . . how on earth can it
fit into a Moscow flat? It's simply impossible! '
Despite the feebleness of the light from Koroviev's lamp, Margarita
realised that she was in a vast, colonnaded hall, dark and apparently
endless. Stopping beside a small couch, Koroviev put his lamp on a pedestal,
gestured to Margarita to sit down and then placed himself beside her in an
artistic pose, one elbow leaned elegantly on the pedestal.
'Allow me to introduce myself,' said Koroviev in a grating voice. ' My
name is Koroviev. Are you surprised that there's no light? Economy, I
suppose you were thinking? Never! May the first murderer to fall at your
feet this evening cut my throat if that's the reason. It is simply because
messire doesn't care for electric light and we keep it turned off until the
last possible moment. Then, believe me, there will be no lack of it. It
might even be better if there were not quite so much.'
Margarita liked Koroviev and she found his flow of light-hearted
nonsense reassuring.
'No,' replied Margarita, ' what really puzzles me is where you have
found the space for all this.' With a wave of her hand Margarita emphasised
the vastness of the hall they were in.
Koroviev smiled sweetly, wrinkling his nose.
'Easy!' he replied. ' For anyone who knows how to handle the fifth
dimension it's no problem to expand any place to whatever size you please.
No, dear lady, I will say more--to the devil knows what size. However, I
have known people,' Koroviev burbled on, ' who though quite ignorant have
done wonders in enlarging their accommodation. One man in this town, so I
was told, was given a three-roomed flat on the Zemlya-noi Rampart and in a
flash, without using the fifth dimension or anything like that, he had
turned it into four rooms by dividing one of the rooms in half with a
partition. Then he exchanged it for two separate flats in different parts of
Moscow, one with three rooms and the other with two. That, you will agree,
adds up to five rooms. He exchanged the three-roomed one for two separate
frwo-roomers and thus became the owner, as you will have noticed, of six
rooms altogether, though admittedly scattered all over Moscow. He was just
about to pull off his last and most brilliant coup by putting an
advertisement in the newspaper offering six rooms in various districts of
Moscow in exchange for one five-roomed flat on the Zemlyanoi Rampart, when
his activities were suddenly and inexplicably curtailed. He may have a room
somewhere now, but not, I can assure you, in Moscow. There's a sharp
operator for you--and you talk of the fifth dimension! '
Although it was Koroviev and not Margarita who had been talking about
the fifth dimension, she could not help laughing at the way he told his
story of the ingenious property tycoon. Koroviev went on:
'But to come to the point, Margarita Nikolayevna. You are a very
intelligent woman and have naturally guessed who our host is.'
Margarita's heart beat faster and she nodded.
'Very well, then,' said Koroviev. ' I will tell you more. We dislike
all mystery and ambiguity. Every year messire gives a ball. It is known as
the springtime ball of the full moon, or the ball of the hundred kings. Ah,

the people who come! . . .' Here Koroviev clutched his cheek as if he had a
toothache. ' However, you will shortly be able to see for yourself. Messire
is a bachelor as you will realise, but there has to be a hostess.' Koroviev
spread his hands : ' You must agree that without a hostess . . .'
Margarita listened to Koroviev, trying not to miss a word. Her heart
felt cold with expectancy, the thought of happiness made her dizzy. '
Firstly, it has become a tradition,' Koroviev went on, ' that the hostess of
the ball must be called Margarita and secondly, she must be a native of the
place where the ball is held. We, as you know, are always on the move and
happen to be in Moscow at present. We have found a hundred and twenty-one
Margaritas in Moscow and would you believe it . . .'-- Koroviev slapped his
thigh in exasperation--'. . . not one of them was suitable! Then at last, by
a lucky chance . . .'
Koroviev grinned expressively, bowing from the waist, and again
Margarita's heart contracted.
'Now to the point!' exclaimed Koroviev. ' To be brief--you won't
decline this responsibility, will you? '
'I will not,' replied Margarita firmly.
'Of course,' said Koroviev, raising his lamp, and added:
'Please follow me.'
They passed a row of columns and finally emerged into another hall
which for some reason smelled strongly of lemons. A rustling noise was heard
and something landed on Margarita's head. She gave a start.
'Don't be afraid,' Koroviev reassured her, taking her arm. ' Just some
stunt that Behemoth has dreamed up to amuse the guests tonight, that's all.
Incidentally, if I may be so bold, Margarita Nikolayevna, my advice to you
is to be afraid of nothing you may see. There's no cause for fear. The ball
will be extravagantly luxurious, I warn you. We shall see people who in
their time wielded enormous power. But when one recalls how microscopic
their influence really was in comparison with the powers of the one in whose
retinue I have the honour to serve they become quite laughable, even
pathetic . . . You too, of course, are of royal blood.'
'How can I be of royal blood? ' whispered Margarita, terrified,
pressing herself against Koroviev.
'Ah, your majesty,' Koroviev teased her, ' the question of blood is
the most complicated problem in the world! If you were to ask certain of
your great-great-great-grandmothers, especially those who had a reputation
for shyness, they might tell you some remarkable secrets, my dear Margarita
Nikolayevna! To draw a parallel--the most amazing combinations can result if
you shuffle the pack enough. There are some matters in which even class
barriers and frontiers are powerless. I rather think that a certain king of
France of the sixteenth century would be most astonished if somebody told
him that after all these years I should have the pleasure of walking arm in
arm
round
a
ballroom
in
Moscow
with
his
great-great-great-great-great-grandaughter. Ah--here we are! '
Koroviev blew out his lamp, it vanished from his hand and Margarita
noticed a patch of light on the floor in front of a black doorway. Koroviev
knocked gently. Margarita grew so excited that her teeth started chattering
and a shiver ran up her spine.
The door opened into a small room. Margarita saw a wide oak bed covered
in dirty, rumpled bedclothes and pillows. In front of the bed was a table
with carved oaken legs bearing a candelabra whose sockets were made in the
shape of birds' claws. Seven fat wax candles burned in their grasp. On the
table there was also a large chessboard set with elaborately carved pieces.
A low bench stood on the small, worn carpet. There was one more table laden
with golden beakers and another candelabra with arms fashioned like snakes.
The room smelled of damp and tar. Shadows thrown by the candlelight
criss-crossed on the floor.
Among the people in the room Margarita at once recognised Azazello, now
also wearing tails and standing near the bed-head. Now that Azazello was
smartly dressed he no longer looked like the ruffian who had appeared to
Margarita in the Alexander Gardens and he gave her a most gallant bow.
The naked witch, Hella, who had so upset the respectable barman from
the Variety Theatre and who luckily for Rimsky had been driven away at

cock-crow, was sitting on the floor by the bed and stirring some concoction
in a saucepan which gave off a sulphurous vapour. Besides these, there was
an enormous black cat sitting on a stool in front of the chessboard and
holding a knight in its right paw.
Hella stood up and bowed to Margarita. The cat jumped down from its
stool and did likewise, but making a flourish it dropped the knight and had
to crawl under the bed after it.
Faint with terror, Margarita blinked at this candlelit pantomime. Her
glance was drawn to the bed, on which sat the man whom the wretched Ivan had
recently assured at Patriarch's Ponds that he did not exist.
Two eyes bored into Margarita's face. In the depths of the right eye
was a golden spark that could pierce any soul to its core; the left eye was
as empty and black as a small black diamond, as the mouth of a bottomless
well of dark and shadow. Woland's face was tilted to one side, the
right-hand corner of his mouth pulled downward and deep furrows marked his
forehead parallel to his eyebrows. The skin of his face seemed burned by
timeless sunshine.
Woland was lying sprawled on the bed, dressed only in a long, dirty
black nightshirt, patched on the left shoulder. One bare leg was tucked up
beneath him, the other stretched out on the bench. Hella was massaging his
knees with a steaming ointment.
On Woland's bare, hairless chest Margarita noticed a scarab on a gold
chain, intricately carved out of black stone and marked on its back with an
arcane script. Near Woland was a strange globe, lit from one side, which
seemed almost alive.
The silence lasted for several seconds. ' He is studying me,' thought
Margarita and by an effort of will tried to stop her legs from trembling.
At last Woland spoke. He smiled, causing his one sparkling eye to
flash.
'Greetings, my queen. Please excuse my homely garb.'
Woland's voice was so low-pitched that on certain syllables it faded
off into' a mere growl.
Woland picked up a long sword from the bed, bent over, poked it under
the bed and said :
'Come out: now. The game's over. Our guest has arrived.'
'Please ...' Koroviev whispered anxiously into Margarita's ear like a
prompter.
'Please . . "' began Margarita.
'Messire . . .' breathed Koroviev.
'Please, messire,' Margarita went on quietly but firmly: ' I beg you
not to interrupt your game. I am sure the chess journals would pay a fortune
to be allowed to print it.'
Azazello gave a slight croak of approval and Woland, staring intently
at Margarita, murmured to himself:
'Yes, Koroviev was right. The result can be amazing when you shuffle
the pack. Blood will tell.'
He stretched out his arm and beckoned Margarita.
She walked up to him, feeling no ground under her bare feet. Woland
placed his hand--as heavy as stone and as hot as fire--on Margarita's
shoulder, pulled her towards him and sat her down on the bed by his side.
'Since you are so charming and kind,' he said, ' which was no more
than I expected, we shan't stand on ceremony.' He leaned over the edge of
the bed again and shouted : ' How much longer is this performance under the
bed going to last? Come on out! '
'I can't find the knight,' replied the cat in a mumed falsetto from
beneath the bed. ' It's galloped off somewhere and there's a frog here
instead.'
'Where do you think you are--on a fairground? ' asked Woland,
pretending to be angry. ' There's no frog under the bed! Save those cheap
tricks for the Variety! If you don't come out at once we'll begin to think
you've gone over to the enemy, you deserter! '
'Never, messire! ' howled the cat, crawling out with the knight in its
paw.
'Allow me to introduce to you . . .' Woland began, then interrupted

himself. ' No, really, he looks too ridiculous! Just look what he's done to
himself while he was under the bed!'
The cat, covered in dust and standing on its hind legs, bowed to
Margarita. Round its neck it was now wearing a made-up white bow tie on an
elastic band, with a pair of ladies' mother-of-pearl binoculars hanging on a
cord. It had also gilded its whiskers.
'What have you done? ' exclaimed Woland. ' Why have you gilded your
whiskers? And what on earth do you want with a white tie when you haven't
even got any trousers? '
'Trousers don't suit cats, messire,' replied the cat with great
dignity. ' Why don't you tell me to wear boots? Cats always wear boots in
fairy tales. But have you ever seen a cat going to a ball without a tie? I
don't want to make myself look ridiculous. One likes to look as smart as one
can. And that also applies to my opera-glasses, messire i'
'But your whiskers? . . .'
'I don't see why,' the cat objected coldly, ' Azazello and Koroviev
are allowed to cover themselves in powder and why powder is better than
gilt. I just powdered my whiskers, that's all. It would be a different
matter if I'd shaved myself! A cleanshaven cat is something monstrous, that
I agree. But I see . . .' --here the cat's voice trembled with pique--'. . .
that this is a conspiracy to be rude about my appearance. Clearly I am faced
with a problem--shall I go to the ball or not? What do you say, messire?'
Outraged, the cat had so inflated itself that it looked about to
explode at any second.
'Ah, the rogue, the sly rogue,' said Woland shaking his head. '
Whenever he's losing a game he starts a spiel like a quack-doctor at a fair.
Sit down and stop all this hot air.'
'Very well,' replied the cat, sitting down, ' but I must object. My
remarks are by no means all hot air, as you so vulgarly put it, but a series
of highly apposite syllogisms which would be appreciated by such
connoisseurs as Sextus Empiricus, Martian Capella, even, who knows,
Aristotle himself.
'Check,' said Woland.
'Check it is,' rejoined the cat, surveying the chessboard through his
lorgnette.
'So,' Woland turned to Margarita, ' let me introduce my retinue. That
creature who has been playing the fool is the cat Behemoth. A2a2ello and
Koroviev you have already met; this
is my maid, Hella. She's prompt, clever, and there's no service she
cannot perform for you.'
The beautiful Hella turned her green eyes on Margarita and smiled,
continuing to scoop out the ointment in the palm of her hand and to rub it
on Woland's knee.
'Well, there they are,' concluded Woland, wincing as Hella massaged
his knee rather too hard. ' A charming and select little band.' He stopped
and began turning his globe, so cleverly made that the blue sea shimmered in
waves and the polar cap was of real ice and snow. On the chessboard,
meanwhile, confusion reigned. Distraught, the white king was stamping about
on his square and waving his arms in desperation. Three white pawns, armed
with halberds, were staring in bewilderment at a bishop who was waving his
crozier and pointing forwards to where Woland's black knights sat mounted on
two hot-blooded horses, one pawing the ground of a white square, the other
on a black square.
Margarita was fascinated by the game and amazed to see that the
chessmen were alive.
Dropping its lorgnette, the cat gently nudged his king in the back, at
which the wretched king covered his face in despair.
'You're in trouble, my dear Behemoth,' said Koroviev in a voice of
quiet malice.
'The position is serious but far from hopeless,' retorted Behemoth. '
What is more, I am confident of ultimate victory. All it needs is a careful
analysis of the situation.'
His method of analysis took the peculiar form of pulling faces and
winking at his king.

'That won't do you any good,' said Koroview. ' Oh! ' cried Behemoth, '
all the parrots have flown away, as I said they would.'
From far away came the sound of innumerable wings. Koroviev and
Azazello rushed out of the room.
'You're nothing but a pest with all your arrangements for the ball,'
grumbled Woland, preoccupied with his globe. As soon as Koroviev and
Azazella had gone. Behemoth's •winking increased until at last the white
king guessed what was required of him. He suddenly pulled off his cloak,
dropped it on his square and walked off the board. The bishop picked up the
royal cloak, threw it round his shoulders and took the king's place.
Koroviev and Azazello returned.
'False alarm, as usual,' growled Azazello.
'Well, I thought I heard something,' said the cat.
'Come on, how much longer do you need? ' asked Woland. ' Check.'
'I must have mis-heard you, mon maitre,' replied the cat. ' My king is
not in check and cannot be.'
'I repeat--check.'
'Messire,' rejoined the cat in a voice of mock anxiety, ' you must be
suffering from over-strain. I am not in check! '
'The king is on square Kz,' said Woland, without looking at the board.
'Messire, you amaze me,' wailed the cat, putting on an amazed face, '
there is no king on that square.'
'What? ' asked Woland, with a puzzled look at the board. The bishop,
standing in the king's square, turned his head away and covered his face
with his hand.
'Aha, you rogue,' said Woland reflectively.
'Messire! I appeal to the laws of logic!' said the cat, clasping its
paws to its chest, ' if a player says check and there is no king on the
board, then the king is not in check! '
'Do you resign or not? ' shouted Woland in a terrible voice.
'Give me time to consider, please,' said the cat meekly. It put its
elbows on the table, covered its ears with its paws and began to think.
Finally, having considered, it said. ' I resign.'
'He needs murdering, the obstinate beast,' whispered Azazello.
'Yes, I resign,' said the cat, ' but only because I find it impossible
to play when I'm distracted by jealous, hostile spectators! ' He stood up
and the chessmen ran back into their box.
'It's time for you to go, Hella,' said Woland and Hella left the room.
' My leg has started, hurting again and now there is this ball . . .' he
went on.
'Allow me,' Margarita suggested gently.
Woland gave her a searching stare and moved his knee towards her.
The ointment, hot as lava, burned her hands but without flinching
Margarita massaged it into Woland's knee, trying not to cause him pain.
'My friends maintain that it's rheumatism,' said Woland, continuing to
stare at Margari.ta, ' but I strongly suspect that the pain is a souvenir of
an encounter with a most beautiful witch that I had in 1571, on the Brocken
in the Harz Mountains.'
'Surely not! ' said Margarita.
'Oh, give it another three hundred years or so and it will go. I've
been prescribed all kinds of medicaments, but I prefer to stick to
traditional old wives' remedies. I inherited some extraordinary herbal cures
from my terrible old grandmother. Tell me, by the way--do you suffer from
any complaint? Perhaps you have some sorrow which is weighing on your heart?
'
'No messire, I have no such complaint,' replied Margarita astutely. '
In any case, since I have been with you I have never felt better.'
'As I said--blood will tell . . .' said Woland cheerfully to no one in
particular, adding: ' I see my globe interests you.'
'I have never seen anything so ingenious.'
'Yes, it is nice. I confess I never like listening to the news on the
radio. It's always read out by some silly girl who can't pronounce foreign
names properly. Besides, at least one in three of the announcers is
tongue-tied, as if they chose them specially. My globe is much more

convenient, especially as I need exact information. Do you see that little
speck of land, for instance, washed by the sea o"n one side? Look, it's just
bursting into flames. War has broken, out there. If you look closer you'll
see it in detail.'
Margarita leaned towards the globe and saw that the little square of
land was growing bigger, emerging in natural colours and turning into a kind
of relief map. Then she saw a river and a village beside it. A house the
size of a pea grew until it was as large as a matchbox. Suddenly and
noiselessly its roof flew upwards in a puff of black smoke, the walls
collapsed leaving nothing of the two-storey matchbox except a few smoking
heaps of rubble. Looking even closer Margarita discerned a tiny female
figure lying on the ground and beside her in a pool of blood a baby with
outstretched arms.
'It's all over now,' said Woland, smiling. ' He was too young to have
sinned. Abadonna has done his work impeccably.'
'I wouldn't like to be on the side that is against Abadonna,' said
Margarita. ' Whose side is he on? '
'The more I talk to you,' said Woland kindly, ' the more convinced I
am that you are very intelligent. Let me reassure you. He is utterly
impartial and is equally sympathetic to the people fighting on either side.
Consequently the outcome is always the same for both sides. Abadonna!'
Woland called softly and from the wall appeared the figure of a man wearing
dark glasses. These glasses made such a powerful impression on Margarita
that she gave a low cry, turned away and hit her head against Woland's leg.
' Stop it! ' cried Woland. ' How nervous people are nowadays! ' He slapped
Margarita on the back so hard that her whole body seemed to ring. ' He's
only wearing spectacles, that's all. There never has been and never will be
a case when Abadonna comes to anyone too soon. In any case, I'm here--you're
my guest. I just wanted to show him to you.'
Abadonna stood motionless.
'Could he take off his glasses for a moment? ' asked Margarita,
pressing against Woland and shuddering, though now with curiosity.
'No, that is impossible,' replied Woland in a grave tone. At a wave of
his hand, Abadonna vanished. ' What did you want to say, Azazello?'
'Messire,' answered Azazello, ' two strangers have arrived-- a
beautiful girl who is whining and begging to be allowed to stay with her
mistress, and with her there is, if you'll forgive me, her pig.'
'What odd behaviour for a girl! ' said Woland.
'It's Natasha--my Natasha! ' exclaimed Margarita.
'Very well, she may stay here with her mistress. Send the pig to the
cooks.'
'Are you going to kill it? ' cried Margarita in fright. ' Please,
messire, that's Nikolai Ivanovich, my neighbour. There was a mistake--she
rubbed the cream on him . . .'
'Who said anything about killing him? ' said Woland. ' I merely want
him to sit at the cooks' table, that's all. I can't allow a pig into the
ballroom, can I? '
'No, of course not,' said Azazello, then announced : ' Midnight
approaches, Messire.'
'Ah, good.' Woland turned to Margarita. ' Now let me thank you in
advance for your services tonight. Don't lose your head and don't be afraid
of anything. Drink nothing except water, otherwise it will sap your energy
and you will find yourself flagging. Time to go! '
As Margarita got up from the carpet Koroviev appeared in the doorway.

23. Satan's Rout

Midnight was approaching, time to hurry. Peering into the dim
surroundings, Margarita discerned some candles and an empty pool carved out
of onyx. As Margarita stood in the pool Hella, assisted by Natasha, poured a

thick, hot red liquid all over her. Margarita tasted salt on her lips and
realised that she was being washed in blood. The bath of blood was followed
by another liquid--dense, translucent and pink, and Margarita's head swam
with attar of roses. Next she was laid on a crystal couch and rubbed with
large green leaves until she glowed.
The cat came in and began to help. It squatted on its haunches at
Margarita's feet and began polishing her instep like a shoeblack.
Margarita never remembered who it was who stitched her shoes out of
pale rose petals or how those shoes fastened themselves of their own accord.
A force lifted her up and placed her in front of a mirror: in her hair
glittered a diamond crown. Koroviev appeared and hung on Margarita's breast
a picture of a black poodle in a heavy oval frame with a massive chain.
Queen Margarita found this ornament extremely burdensome, as the chain hurt
her neck and the picture pulled her over forwards. However, the respect with
which Koroviev and Behemoth now treated her was some recompense for the
discomfort.
'There's nothing for it,' murmured Koroviev at the door of the room
with the pool. ' You must wear it round your neck-- you must... Let me give
you a last word of advice, your majesty. The guests at the ball will be
mixed- -oh, very mixed--but you must show no favouritism, queen Margot! If
you don't like anybody ... I realise that you won't show it in your face, of
course not--but you must not even let it cross your mind! If you do, the
guest is bound to notice it instantly. You must be sweet and kind to them
all, your majesty. For that, the hostess of the ball will be rewarded a
hundredfold. And another thing-- don't neglect anybody or fail to notice
them. Just a smile if you haven't time to toss them a word, even just a
little turn of your head! Anything you like except inattention--they can't
bear that. . . .'
Escorted by Koroviev and Behemoth, Margarita stepped out of the bathing
hall and into total darkness.
'Me, me,' whispered the cat, ' let me give the signal! '
'All right, give it,' replied Koroviev from the dark.
'Let the ball commence! ' shrieked the cat in a piercing voice.
Margarita screamed and shut her eyes for several seconds. The ball burst
upon her in an explosion of light, sound and smell. Arm in arm with
Koroviev, Margarita found herself in a tropical forest. Scarlet-breasted
parrots with green tails perched on lianas and hopping from branch to branch
uttered deafening screeches of ' Ecstasy! Ecstasy! ' The forest soon came to
an end and its hot, steamy air gave way to the cool of a ballroom with
columns made of a yellowish, iridescent stone. Like the forest the ballroom
was completely empty except for some naked Negroes in silver turbans holding
candelabra. Their faces paled with excitement when Margarita floated into
the ballroom with her suite, to which Azazello had now attached himself.
Here Koroviev released Margarita's arm and whispered :
'Walk straight towards the tulips! '
A low wall of white tulips rose up in front of Margarita. Beyond it she
saw countless lights in globes, and rows of men in tails and starched white
shirts. Margarita saw then where the sound of ball music had been coming
from. A roar of brass deafened her and the soaring violins that broke
through it poured over her body like blood. The orchestra, all hundred and
fifty of them, were playing a polonaise.
Seeing Margarita the tail-coated conductor turned pale, smiled and
suddenly raised the whole orchestra to its feet with a wave of his arm.
Without a moment's break in the music the orchestra stood and engulfed
Margarita in sound. The conductor turned away from the players and gave a
low bow. Smiling, Margarita waved to him.
'No, no, that won't do,' whispered Koroviev. ' He won't sleep all
night. Shout to him " Bravo, king of the walt2! " '
Margarita shouted as she was told, amazed that her voice, full as a
bell, rang out over the noise of the orchestra. The conductor gave a start
of pleasure, placed his left hand on his heart and with his right went on
waving his white baton at the orchestra.
'Not enough,' whispered Koroviev. ' Look over there at the first
violins and nod to them so that every one of them thinks you recognise him

personally. They are all world famous. Look, there ... on the first
desk--that's Joachim! That's right! Very good . . . Now--on we go.'
'Who is the conductor? ' asked Margarita as she floated away.
'Johann Strauss!' cried the cat. ' May I be hung from a liana in the
tropical forest if any ball has ever had an orchestra like this! I arranged
it! And not one of them was ill or refused to come!'
There were no columns in the next hall, but instead it was flanked by
walls of red, pink, and milky-white roses on one side and on the other by
banks of Japanese double camellias. Fountains played between the walls of
flowers and champagne bubbled in three ornamental basins, the first of which
was a translucent violet in colour, the second ruby, the third crystal.
Negroes in scarlet turbans were busy with silver scoops filling shallow
goblets with champagne from the basins. In a gap in the wall of roses was a
man bouncing up and down on a stage in a red swallow-tail coat, conducting
an unbearably loud jazz band. As soon as he saw Margarita he bent down in
front of her until his hands touched the floor, then straightened up and
said in a piercing yell:
'Alleluia!'
He slapped himself once on one knee, then twice on the other, snatched
a cymbal from the hands of a nearby musician and struck it against a pillar.
As she floated away Margarita caught a glimpse of the virtuoso
bandleader, struggling against the polonaise that she could still hear
behind her, hitting the bandsmen on the head with his cymbal while they
crouched in comic terror.
At last they regained the platform where Koroviev had first met
Margarita with the lamp. Now her eyes were blinded with the light streaming
from innumerable bunches of crystal grapes. Margarita stopped and a little
amethyst pillar appeared under her left hand.
'You can rest your hand on it if you find it becomes too tiring,'
whispered Koroviev.
A black-skinned boy put a cushion embroidered with a golden poodle
under Margarita's feet. Obeying the pressure of an invisible hand she bent
her knee and placed her right foot on the cushion.
Margarita glanced around. Koroviev and Azazello were standing in formal
attitudes. Besides Azazello were three young men, who vaguely reminded
Margarita of Abadonna. A cold wind blew in her back. Looking round Margarita
saw that wine was foaming out of the marble wall into a basin made of ice.
She felt something warm and velvety by her left leg. It was Behemoth.
Margarita was standing at the head of a vast carpeted staircase
stretching downwards in front of her. At the bottom, so far away that she
seemed to be looking at it through the wrong end of a telescope, she could
see a vast hall with an absolutely immense fireplace, into whose cold, black
maw one could easily have driven a five-ton lorry. The hall and the
staircase, bathed in painfully bright light, were empty. Then Margarita
heard the sound of distant trumpets. For some minutes they stood motionless.
'Where are the guests? ' Margarita asked Koroviev.
'They will be here at any moment, your majesty. There will be no lack
of them. I confess I'd rather be sawing logs than receiving them here on
this platform.'
'Sawing logs? ' said the garrulous cat. ' I'd rather be a
tram-conductor and there's no job worse than that.'
'Everything must be prepared in advance, your majesty,' explained
Koroviev, his eye glittering behind the broken lens of his monocle. ' There
can be nothing more embarrassing than for the first guest to wait around
uncomfortably, not knowing what to do, while his lawful consort curses him
in a whisper for arriving too early. We cannot allow that at our ball, queen
Margot.'
'I should think not', said the cat.
'Ten seconds to midnight,' said Koroviev, ' it will begin in a
moment.'
Those ten seconds seemed unusually long to Margarita. They had
obviously passed but absolutely nothing seemed to be happening. Then there
was a crash from below in the enormous fireplace and out of it sprang a
gallows with a half-decayed corpse bouncing on its arm. The corpse jerked

itself loose from the rope, fell to the ground and stood up as a dark,
handsome man in tailcoat and lacquered pumps. A small, rotting coffin then
slithered out of the fireplace, its lid flew off and another corpse jumped
out. The handsome man stepped gallantly towards it and offered his bent arm.
The second corpse turned into a nimble little woman in black slippers and
black feathers on her head and then man and woman together hurried up the
staircase.
'The first guests!' exclaimed Koroviev. ' Monsieur Jacques and his
wife. Allow me to introduce to you, your majesty, a most interesting man. A
confirmed forger, a traitor to his country but no mean alchemist. He was
famous,' Koroviev whispered into Margarita's ear, ' for having poisoned the
king's mistress. Not everybody can boast of that, can they? See how
good-looking he is! '
Turning pale and open-mouthed with shock, Margarita looked down and saw
gallows and coffin disappear through a side door in the hall.
'We are delighted! ' the cat roared to Monsieur Jacques as he mounted
the steps.
Just then a headless, armless skeleton appeared in the fireplace below,
fell down and turned into yet another man in a tailcoat. Monsieur Jacques'
wife had by now reached the head of the staircase where she knelt down, pale
with excitement, and kissed Margarita's foot.
'Your majesty . . .' murmured Madame Jacques.
'Her majesty is charmed! ' shouted Koroviev. 'Your majesty . . .' said
Monsieur Jacques in a low voice.
'We are charmed! ' intoned the cat. The young men beside Azazello,
smiling lifeless but welcoming smiles, were showing Monsieur and Madame
Jacques to one side, wlhere they were offered goblets of champagne by the
Negro attendants. The single man in tails came up the staircase at a run.
'Count Robert,' Koroviev whispered to Margarita. ' An equally
interesting character. Rather amusing, your majesty-- the case is reversed:
he was the queen's lover and poisoned his own wife.'
'We are delighted. Count,' cried Behemoth.
One after another three coffins bounced out o.f the fireplace,
splitting and breaking open as they fell, then someone in a black cloak who
was immediately stabbed in the back by the next person to come down the
chimney. There was a muffled shriek. When an almost totally decomposed
corpse emerged from the fireplace, Margarita frowned and a hand, which
seemed to be Natasha's, offered her a flacon of sal volatile.
The staircase began to fill up. Now on almost every step there were men
in tailcoats accompanied by naked women who only differed in the colour of
their shoes and the feathers on their heads.
Margarita noticed a woman with the downcast gaze of a nun hobbling
towards her, thin, shy, hampered by a stsrange wooden boot on her left leg
and a broad green kerchief round her neck.
'Who's that woman in green? ' Margarita enquired.
'A most charming and respectable lady,' whispered Koroviev. ' Let me
introduce you--Signora Toffana. She was extremely popular among the young
and attractive ladies of Naples and Palermo, especially among those who were
tired of their husbands. Women do get bored with their husbands, your
majesty . . .' ' Yes,' replied Margarita dully, smiling to two men in
evening dress who were bowing to kiss her knee and her foot.
'Well,' Koroviev managed to whisper to Margarita as he simultaneously
cried : ' Duke! A glass of champagne? We are charmed! . . . Well, Signora
Toffana sympathised with those poor women and sold them some liquid in a
bladder. The woman poured the liquid into her husband's soup, who ate it,
thanked her for it and felt splendid. However, after a few hours he would
begin to feel a terrible thirst, then lay down on his bed and a day later
another beautiful Neapolitan lady was as free as air.'
'What's that on her leg? ' asked Margarita, without ceasing to offer
her hand to the guests who had overtaken Signora Toffana on the way up. '
And why is she wearing green round her neck? Has she a withered neck? '
'Charmed, Prince!' shouted Koroviev as he whispered to Margarita : '
She has a beautiful neck, but something unpleasant happened to her in
prison. The thing on her leg, your majesty, is a Spanish boot and she wears

a scarf because when her jailers found out that about five hundred
ill-matched husbands had been dispatched from Naples and Palermo for ever,
they strangled Signora Toffana in a rage.'
'How happy I am, your majesty, that I have the great honour . . .'
whispered Signora Toffana in a nun-like voice, trying to fall on one knee
but hindered by the Spanish boot. Koroviev and Behemoth helped Signora
Toffana to rise.
'I am delighted,' Margarita answered her as she gave her hand to the
next arrival.
People were now mounting the staircase in a flood. Margarita ceased to
notice the arrivals in the hall. Mechanically she raised and lowered her
hand, bared her teeth in a smile for each new guest. The landing behind her
was buzzing with voices, and music like the waves of the sea floated out
from the ball-rooms.
'Now this woman is a terrible bore.' Koroviev no longer bothered to
whisper but shouted it aloud, certain that no one could hear his voice over
the hubbub. ' She loves coming to a ball because it gives her a chance to
complain about her handkerchief.'
Among the approaching crowd Margarita's glance picked out the woman at
whom Koroviev was pointing. She was young, about twenty, with a remarkably
beautiful figure but a look of nagging reproach.
'What handkerchief? ' asked Margarita.
'A maid has been assigned to her,' Koroviev explained, ' who for
thirty years has been putting a handkerchief on her bedside table. It is
there every morning when she wakes up. She burns it in the stove or throws
it in the river but every morning it appears again beside her.'
'What handkerchief?' whispered Margarita, continuing to lower and
raise her hand to the guests.
'A handkerchief with a blue border. One day when she was a waitress in
a cafe the owner enticed her into the storeroom and nine months later she
gave birth to a boy, carried him into the woods, stuffed a handkerchief into
his mouth and then buried him. At the trial she said she couldn't afford to
feed the child.'
'And where is the cafe-owner? ' asked Margarita.
'But your majesty,' the cat suddenly growled, ' what has the
cafe-owner got to do with it? It wasn't he who stifled the baby in the
forest, was it? '
Without ceasing to smile and to shake hands with her right hand, she
dug the sharp nails of her left hand into Behemoth's ear and whispered to
the cat:
'If you butt into the conversation once more, you little horror . . .'
Behemoth gave a distinctly unfestive squeak and croaked:
'Your majesty . . . you'll make my ear swell . . . why spoil the ball
with a swollen ear? I was speaking from the legal point of view ... I'll be
quiet, I promise, pretend I'm not a cat, pretend I'm a fish if you like but
please let go of my ear!'
Margarita released his ear.
The woman's grim, importunate eyes looked into Margarita's :
'I am so happy, your majesty, to be invited to the great ball of the
full moon.'
'And I am delighted to see you,' Margarita answered her, ' quite
delighted. Do you like champagne? '
'Hurry up, your majesty! ' hissed Koroviev quietly but desperately. '
You're causing a traffic-jam on the staircase.'
'Yes, I like champagne,' said the woman imploringly, and began to
repeat mechanically: ' Frieda, Frieda, Frieda! My name is Frieda, your
majesty! '
'Today you may get drunk, Frieda, and forget about everything,' said
Margarita.
Frieda stretched out both her arms to Margarita, but Koroviev and
Behemoth deftly took an arm each and whisked her off into the crowd.
By now people were advancing from below like a phalanx bent on
assaulting the landing where Margarita stood. The naked women mounting the
staircase between the tail-coated and white-tied men floated up in a

spectrum of coloured bodies that ranged from white through olive, copper and
coffee to quite black. In hair that was red, black, chestnut or flaxen,
sparks flashed from precious stones. Diamond-studded orders glittered on the
jackets and shirt-fronts of the men. Incessantly Margarita felt the touch of
lips to her knee, incessantly she offered her hand to be kissed, her face
stretched into a rigid mask of welcome.
'Charmed,' Koroviev would monotonously intone, ' We are charmed . . .
her majesty is charmed . . .'
'Her majesty is charmed,' came a nasal echo from Azazello, standing
behind her.
'I am charmed! ' squeaked the cat.
'Madame la marquise,' murmured Koroviev, ' poisoned her father, her
two brothers and two sisters for the sake of an inheritance . . . Her
majesty is delighted, Mme. Minkin! . . . Ah, how pretty she is! A trifle
nervous, though. Why did she have to burn her maid with a pair of
curling-tongs? Of course, in the way she used them it was bound to be fatal
. . . Her majesty is charmed! . . . Look, your majesty--the Emperor Rudolf-magician and alchemist . . . Another alchemist--he was hanged . . . Ah,
there she is! What a magnificent brothel she used to keep in Strasbourg! . .
. We arc delighted, madame! . . . That woman over there was a Moscow
dressmaker who had the brilliantly funny idea of boring two peep-holes in
the wall of her fitting-room . . .'
'And didn't her lady clients know? enquired Margarita. ' Of course,
they all knew, your majesty,' replied Koroviev. ' Charmed! . . . That young
man over there was a dreamer and an eccentric from childhood. A girl fell in
love with him and he sold her to a brothel-keeper . . .
On and on poured the stream from below. Its source--the huge
fireplace--showed no sign of drying up. An hour passed, then another.
Margarita felt her chain weighing more and more. Something odd was happening
to her hand : she found she could not lift it without wincing. Koroviev's
remarks ceased to interest her. She could no longer distinguish between
slant-eyed Mongol faces, white faces and black faces. They all merged into a
blur and the air between them seemed to be quivering. A sudden sharp pain
like a needle stabbed at Margarita's right hand, and clenching her teeth she
leaned her elbow on the little pedestal. A sound like the rustling of wings
came from the rooms behind her as the horde of guests danced, and Margarita
could feel the massive floors of marble, crystal and mosaic pulsating
rhythmically.
Margarita showed as little interest in the emperor Caius Caligula and
Messalina as she did in the rest of the procession of kings, dukes, knights,
suicides, poisoners, gallows-birds, procuresses, jailers, card-sharpers,
hangmen, informers, traitors, madmen, detectives and seducers. Her head swam
with their names, their faces merged into a great blur and only one face
remained fixed in her memory--Malyuta Skuratov with his fiery beard.
Margarita's legs were buckling and she was afraid that she n^ight burst into
tears at any moment. The worst pain came from her right knee, which all the
guests had kissed. It was swollen, the skin on it had turned blue in spite
of Natasha's constant attention to it with a sponge soaked in fragrant
ointment. By the end of the third hour Margarita glanced wearily down and
saw with a start of joy that the flood of guests was thinning out.
'Every ball is the same, your majesty.' whispered Koroviev, ' at about
this time the arrivals begin to decrease. I promise you that this torture
will not last more than a few minutes longer. Here comes a party of witches
from the Brocken, they're always the last to arrive. Yes, there they are.
And a couple of drunken vampires ... is that all? Oh, no, there's one more .
. . no, two more.'
The last two guests mounted the staircase.
'Now this is someone new,' said Koroviev, peering through his monocle.
' Oh, yes, now I remember. Azazello called on him once and advised him, over
a glass of brandy, how to get rid of a man who was threatening to denounce
him. So he made his friend, who was under an obligation to him, spray the
other man's office walls with poison.'
'What's his name? ' asked Margarita.
'I'm afraid I don't know,' said Koroviev, ' You'd better ask Azazello.

'And who's that with him? '
'That's his friend who did the job. Delighted to welcome you! ' cried
Koroviev to the last two guests.
The staircase was empty, and although the reception committee waited a
little longer to make sure, no one else appeared from the fireplace.
A second later, half-fainting, Margarita found herself beside the pool
again where, bursting into tears from the pain in her arm and leg, she
collapsed to the floo:r. Hella and Natasha comforted her, doused her in
blood and massaged her body until she revived again.
'Once more, queen Margot,' whispered Koroviev. ' You must make the
round of the ballrooms just once more to show our guests that they are not
being neglected.'
Again Margarita floated away from the pool. In place of Johan Strauss'
orchestra the stage behind the wall of tulips had been taken over by a jazz
band of frenetic apes. An enormous gorilla with shaggy sideburns and holding
a trumpet was leaping clumsily up and down as he conducted. Orang-utan
trumpeters sat in the front row, each with a chimpanzee accordionist on his
shoulders. Two baboons with manes like lions' were playing the piano, their
efforts completely drowned by the roaring, squeaking and banging of the
saxophones, violins and drums played by troops of gibbons, mandrils and
marmosets. Innumerable couples circled round the glass floor with amazing
dexterity, a mass of bodies moving lightly and gracefully as one. Live
butterflies fluttered over the dancing horde, flowers drifted down from the
ceiling. The electric light had been turned out, the capitals of the pillars
were now lit by myriads of glow-worms, and will-o'-the-wisps danced through
the air.
Then Margarita found herself by the side of another pool, this time of
vast dimensions and ringed by a colonnade. A gigantic black Neptune was
pouring a broad pink stream from his great mouth. Intoxicating fumes of
champagne rose from the pool. Joy reigned untrammelled. Women, laughing,
handed their bags to their escorts or to the Negroes who ran along the sides
holding towels, and dived shrieking into the pool. Spray rose in showers.
The crystal bottom of the pool glowed with a faint light which shone through
the sparkling wine to light up the silvery bodies of the swimmers, who
climbed out of the pool again completely drunk. Laughter rang out beneath
the pillars until it drowned even the jazz ba.nd.
In all this debauch Margarita distinctly saw one totally drunken
woman's face with eyes that were wild with intoxication yet still
imploring--Frieda.
Margarita's head began to spin with the fumes of the wine and she was
just about to move on when the cat staged one of his tricks in the swimming
pool. Behemoth made a few magic passes in front of Neptune's moiath ;
immediately all the champagne drained out of the pool, an-d Neptune began
spewing forth a stream of brown liquid. Shrieking with delight the women
screamed : ' Brandy! ' In a few seconds the pool was full. Spinning round
three times like a top the cat leaped into the air and dived into the
turbulent sea of brandy. It crawled out, spluttering, its tie soaked, the
gilding gone from its whiskers, and minus its lorgnette. Only one woman
dared follow Behemoth's example --the dressmaker--procuress and her escort,
a handsome young mulatto. They both dived into the brandy, but before she
had time to see any more Margarita was led away by Koroviev.
They seemed to take wing and in their flight Margarita first saw great
stone tanks full of oysters, then a row of hellish furnaces blazing away
beneath the glass floor and attended by a frantic crew of diabolical chefs.
In the confusion she remembered a glimpse of dark caverns lit by candles
where girls were serving meat that sizzled on glowing coals and revellers
drank Margarita's health from vast mugs of beer. Then came polar bears
playing accordions and dancing a Russian dance on a stage, a salamander
doing conjuring tricks unharmed by the flames around it ... And for a second
time Margarita felt her strength beginning to flag.
'The last round,' whispered Koroviev anxiously, ' and then we're
free.'
Escorted by Koroviev, Margarita returned to the ballroom, but now the
dance had stopped and the guests were crowded between the pillars, leaving

an open space in the middle of the room. Margarita could not remember who
helped her up to a platform which appeared in the empty space. When she had
mounted it, to her amazement she heard a bell strike midnight, although by
her reckoning midnight was long past. At the last chime of the invisible
clock silence fell on the crowd of guests.
Then Margarita saw Woland. He approached surrounded by Abadonna,
Azazello and several young men in black resembling Abadonna. She now noticed
another platform beside her own, prepared for Woland. But he did not make
use of it. Margarita was particularly surprised to notice that Woland
appeared at the ball in exactly the same state in which he had been in the
bedroom. The same dirty, patched nightshirt hung from his shoulders and his
feet were in darned bedroom slippers. Woland was armed with his sword but he
leaned on the naked weapon as though it were a walking stick.
Limping, Woland stopped beside his platform. At once Azazello appeared
in front of him bearing a dish. On that dish Margarita saw the severed head
of a man with most of its front teeth missing. There was still absolute
silence, only broken by the distant sound, puzzling in the circumstances, of
a door-bell ringing.
'Mikhail Alexandrovich,' said Woland quietly to the head, at which its
eyelids opened. With a shudder Margarita saw that the eyes in that dead face
were alive, fully conscious and tortured with pain.
'It all came true, didn't it? ' said Woland, staring at the eyes of
the head. ' Your head was cut off by a woman, the meeting didn't take place
and I am living in your flat. That is a fact. And a fact is the most
obdurate thing in the world. But what interests us now is the future, not
the facts of the past. You have always been a fervent proponent of the
theory that when a man's head is cut off his life stops, he turns to dust
and he ceases to exist. I am glad to be able to tell you in front of all my
guests-- despite the fact that their presence here is proof to the contrary
--that your theory is intelligent and sound. Now--one theory deserves
another. Among them there is one which maintains that a man will receive his
deserts in accordance with his beliefs. So be it! You shall depart into the
void and from the goblet into which your skull is about to be transformed I
shall have the pleasure of drinking to life eternal! '
Woland raised his sword. Immediately the skin of the head darkened and
shrank, then fell away in shreds, the eyes disappeared and in a second
Margarita saw on the dish a yellowed skull, with emerald eyes and pearl
teeth, mounted on a golden stand. The top of the skull opened with a hinge.
'In a second, messire,' said Koroviev, noticing Woland's enquiring
glance, ' he will stand before you. I can hear the creak of his shoes and
the tinkle as he puts down the last glass of champagne of his lifetime. Here
he is.'
A new guest, quite alone, entered the ballroom. Outwardly he was no
different from the thousands of other male guests, except in one thing--he
was literally staggering with fright. Blotches glowed on his cheeks and his
eyes were swivelling with alarm. The guest was stunned. Everything that he
saw shocked him, above all the way Woland was dressed.
Yet he was greeted with marked courtesy.
'Ah, my dear Baron Maigel,' Woland said with a welcoming smile to his
guest, whose eyes were starting out of his head. ' I am happy to introduce
to you,' Woland turned towards his guests, ' Baron Maigel, who works for the
Entertainments Commission as a guide to the sights of the capital for
foreign visitors.'
Then Margarita went numb. She recognised this man Maigel. She had
noticed him several times in Moscow theatres and restaurants. ' Has he died
too? ' Margarita wondered. But the matter was soon explained.
'The dear Baron,' Woland continued with a broad smile, ' was charming
enough to ring me up as soon as I arrived in Moscow and to offer me his
expert services as a guide to the sights of the city. Naturally I was happy
to invite him to come and see me.'
Here Margarita noticed that Azazello handed the dish with the skull to
Koroviev.
'By the way. Baron,' said Woland, suddenly lowering his voice
confidentially, ' rumours have been going round that you have an

unquenchable curiosity. This characteristic, people say, together with your
no less developed conversational gifts, has begun to attract general
attention. What is more, evil tongues have let slip the words "
eavesdropper" and " spy." What is more, there is a suggestion that this may
bring you to an unhappy end in less than a month from now. So in order to
save you from the agonising suspense of waiting, we have decided to come to
your help, making use of the fact that you invited yourself to see me with
the aim of spying and eavesdropping as much as you could.'
The Baron turned paler than the pallid Abadonna and then something
terrible happened. Abadonna stepped in front of the Baron and for a second
took off his spectacles. At that moment there was a flash and a crack from
Azazello's hand and the Baron staggered, crimson blood spurting from his
chest and drenching his starched shirtfront and waistcoat. Koroviev placed
the skull under the pulsating stream of blood and when the goblet was full
handed it to Woland. The Baron's lifeless body had meanwhile crumpled to the
floor.
'Your health, ladies and gentlemen,' said Woland and raised the goblet
to his lips.
An instant metamorphosis took place. The nightshirt and darned slippers
vanished. Woland was wearing a black gown with a sword at his hip. He strode
over to Margarita, offered her the goblet and said in a commanding voice :
'Drink!'
Margarita felt dizzy, but the cup was already at her lips and a voice
was whispering in her ears :
'Don't be afraid, your majesty . . . don't be afraid, your majesty,
the blood has long since drained away into the earth and grapes have grown
on the spot.'
Her eyes shut, Margarita took a sip and the sweet juice ran through her
veins, her ears rang. She was deafened by cocks crowing, a distant band
played a march. The crowd of guests faded--the tailcoated men and the women
withered to dust and before her eyes the bodies began to rot, the stench of
the tomb filled the air. The columns dissolved, the lights went out, the
fountains dried up and vanished with the camellias and the tulips. All that
remained was what had been there before : poor Berlioz's drawing-room, with
a shaft of light falling through its half-open door. Margarita opened it
wide and went in.

24. The Master is Released

Everything in Woland's bedroom was as it had been before the ball.
Woland was sitting in his nightshirt on the bed, only this time Hella was
not rubbing his knee, and a meal was laid on the table in place of the
chessboard. Koroviev and Azazello had removed their tailcoats and were
sitting at table, alongside them the cat, who still refused to be parted
from his bow-tie even though it was by now reduced to a grubby shred.
Tottering, Margarita walked up to the table and leaned on it. Woland
beckoned her, as before, to sit beside him on the bed. ' Well, was it very
exhausting? ' enquired Woland. ' Oh no, messire,' replied Margarita in a
scarcely audible voice. ' Noblesse oblige,' remarked the cat, pouring out a
glassful of clear liquid for Margarita.
'Is that vodka? ' Margarita asked weakly. The cat jumped up from its
chair in indignation. ' Excuse me, your majesty,' he squeaked, ' do you
think I would give vodka to a lady? That is pure spirit!' Margarita smiled
and tried to push away the glass. ' Drink it up,' said Woland and Margarita
at once picked up the glass.
'Sit down, Hella,' ordered Woland, and explained to Margarita : ' The
night of the full moon is a night of celebration, and I dine in the company
of my close friends and my servants. Well, how do you feel? How did you find
that exhausting ball? '

'Shattering! ' quavered Koroviev. ' They were all charmed, they all
fell in love with her, they were all crushed! Such tact, such savoir-faire,
such fascination, such charm! '
Woland silently raised his glass and clinked it with Margarita's. She
drank obediently, expecting the spirit to knock her out. It had no ill
effect, however. The reviving warmth flowed through her body, she felt a
mild shock in the back of her neck, her strength returned as if she had just
woken from a long refreshing sleep and she felt ravenously hungry.
Remembering that she had not eaten since the morning of the day before, her
hunger increased and she began wolfing down caviar.
Behemoth cut himself a slice of pineapple, salted and peppered it, ate
it and chased it down with a second glass of spirit with a flourish that
earned a round of applause.
After Margarita's second glassful the light in the candelabra burned
brighter and the coals in the fireplace glowed hotter, yet she did not feel
the least drunk. As her white teeth bit into the meat Margarita savoured the
delicious juice that poured from it and watched Behemoth smearing an oyster
with mustard.
'If I were you I should put a grape on top of it, too,' said Hella,
digging the cat in the ribs.
'Kindly don't teach your grandmother to suck eggs,' Behemoth replied.
' I know how to behave at table, so mind your own business.'
'Oh, how nice it is to dine like this, at home,' tinkled Koro-viev's
voice, ' just among friends . . .'
'No, Faggot,' said the cat. ' I like the ball--it's so grand and
exciting.'
'It's not in the least exciting and not very grand either, and those
idiotic bears and the tigers in the bar--they nearly gave me migraine with
their roaring,' said Woland.
'Of course, messire,' said the cat. ' If you think it wasn't very
grand, I immediately find myself agreeing with you.'
'And so I should think,' replied Woland.
'I was joking,' said the cat meekly ' and as for those tigers, I'll
have them roasted.'
'You can't eat tiger-meat' said Hella.
'Think so? Well, let me tell you a story,' retorted the cat. Screwing
up its eyes with pleasure it told a story of how it had once spent nineteen
days wandering in the desert and its only food had been the meat of a tiger
it had killed. They all listened with fascination and when Behemoth came to
the end of his story they all chorussed in unison :
'Liar! '
'The most interesting thing about that farrago,' said Woland, ' was
that it was a lie from first to last.'
'Oh, you think so, do you? ' exclaimed the cat and everybody thought
that it was about to protest again, but it only said quietly : ' History
will be my judge.'
'Tell me,' revived by the vodka Margot turned to Azazello :
'did you shoot that ex-baron? '
'Of course,' replied Azazello,' why not? He needed shooting.'
'I had such a shock! ' exclaimed Margarita, ' it happened so
unexpectedly! '
'There was nothing unexpected about it,' Azazello objected, and
Koroviev whined :
'Of course she was shocked. Why, even I was shaking in my shoes! Bang!
Crash! Down went the baron! '
'I nearly had hysterics,' added the cat, licking a caviar-smeared
spoon.
'But there's something I can't understand,' said Margarita, her eyes
sparkling with curiosity. ' Couldn't the music and general noise of the ball
be heard outside? '
'Of course not, your majesty,' said Koroviev. ' We saw to that. These
things must be done discreetly.'
'Yes, I see ... but what about that man on the staircase when Azazello
and I came up ... and the other one at the foot of the staircase? I had the

impression that they were keeping watch on your flat.'
'You're right, you're right,' cried Koroviev,' you're right, my dear
Margarita Nikolayevna! You have confirmed my suspicions. Yes, he was
watching our flat. For a while I thought he was some absent-minded professor
or a lover mooning about on the staircase. But no! I had an uncomfortable
feeling he might be watching the flat. And there was another one at the
bottom of the stairs too? And the one at the main entrance-- did he look the
same? ' ' Suppose they come and arrest you? ' asked Margarita.
'Oh, they'll come all right, fairest one, they'll come!' answered
Koroviev. ' I feel it in my bones. Not now, of course, but they'll come when
they're ready. But I don't think they'll have much luck.'
'Oh, what a shock I had when the Baron fell! ' said Margarita,
obviously still feeling the effects of seeing her first murder. ' I suppose
you're a good shot? '
'Fair,' answered Azazello.
'At how many paces? '
'As many as you like,' replied Azazello. ' It's one thing to hit
Latunsky's windows with a hammer, but it's quite another to hit him in the
heart.'
'In the heart! ' exclaimed Margarita, clutching her own heart. ' In
the heart! ' she repeated grimly.
'What's this about Latunsky? ' enquired Woland, frowning at Margarita.
Azazello, Koroviev and Behemoth looked down in embarrassment and
Margarita replied, blushing :
'He's a critic. I wrecked his flat this evening.'
'Did you now! Why?'
'Because, messire,' Margarita explained, ' he destroyed a certain
master.'
'But why did you put yourself to such trouble?' asked Woland.
'Let me do it, messire!' cried the cat joyfully, jumping to its feet.
'You sit down,' growled Azazello, rising. ' I'll go at once.'
'No!' cried Margarita. ' No, I beg you, messire, you mustn't!'
'As you wish, as you wish,' replied Woland. Azazello sat down again.
'Where were we, precious queen Margot?' said Koroviev. ' Ah yes, his
heart... He can hit a man's heart all right,' Koroviev pointed a long
.finger at Azazello. ' Anywhere you like. Just name the auricle--or the
ventricle.'
For a moment Margarita did not grasp the implication of this, then she
exclaimed in amazement:
'But they're inside the body--you can't see them! '
'My dear,' burbled Koroviev, ' that's the whole point--you can't see
them! That's the joke! Any fool can hit something you can see!'
Koroviev took the seven of spades out of a box, showed it to Margarita
and asked her to point at one of the pips. Margarita chose the one in the
upper right-hand corner. Hella hid the card under a pillow and shouted :
'Ready!'
Azazello, who was sitting with his back to the pillow, took a black
automatic out of his trouser pocket, aimed the muzzle over his shoulder and,
without turning round towards the bed, fired, giving Margarita an enjoyable
shock. The seven of spades was removed from under the pillow. The upper
right-hand pip was shot through.
'I wouldn't like to meet you when you've got a revolver,' said
Margarita with a coquettish look at Azazello. She had a passion for people
who did things well.
'My precious queen,' squeaked Koroviev,' I don't recommend anybody to
meet him even without his revolver! I give you my word of honour as an
ex-choirmaster that anybody who did would regret it.'
During the trial of marksmanship the cat had sat scowling. Suddenly it
announced:
'I bet I can shoot better than that.'
Azazello snorted, but Behemoth was insistent and demanded not one but
two revolvers. Azazello drew another pistol from his left hip pocket and
with a sarcastic grin handed them both to the cat. Two pips on the card were
selected. The cat took a long time to prepare, then turned its back on the

cushion. Margarita sat down with her fingers in her ears and stared at the
owl dozing on the mantelpiece. Behemoth fired from both revolvers, at which
there came a yelp from Hella, the owl fell dead from the mantelpiece and the
clock stopped from a bullet in its vitals. Hella, one finger bleeding, sank
her nails into the cat's fur. Behemoth in retaliation clawed at her hair and
the pair of them rolled on the floor in a struggling heap. A glass fell off
the table and broke.
'Somebody pull this she-devil off me! ' wailed the cat, lashing out at
Hella who had thrown the animal on its back and was sitting astride it. The
combatants were separated and Koroviev healed Hella's wounded finger by
blowing on it.
'I can't shoot properly when people are whispering about me behind my
back! ' shouted Behemoth, trying to stick back into place a large handful of
fur that had been torn off his back.
'I bet you,' said Woland with a smile at Margarita, ' that he did that
on purpose. He can shoot perfectly well.'
Hella and the cat made friends again and sealed their reconciliation
with a kiss. Someone removed the card from under the cushion and examined
it. Not a single pip, except the one shot through by Azazello had been
touched.
'I don't believe it,' said the cat, staring through the hole in the
card at the light of the candelabra.
Supper went gaily on. The candles began to gutter, a warm dry heat
suffused the room from the fireplace. Having eaten her fill, a feeling of
well-being came over Margarita. She watched as Azazello blew smoke-rings at
the fireplace and the cat spiked them on the end of his sword. She felt no
desire to go, although by her timing it was late--probably, she thought,
about six o'clock in the morning. During a pause Margarita turned to Woland
and said timidly :
'Excuse me, but it's time for me to go ... it's getting late . . .' '
Where are you going in such a hurry?' enquired Woland politely but a little
coldly. The others said nothing, pretending to be watching the game with the
smoke-rings.
'Yes, it's time,' said Margarita uneasily and turned round as if
looking for a cloak or something else to wear. Her nakedness was beginning
to embarrass her. She got up from the table. In silence Woland picked up his
greasy dressing-gown from the bed and Koroviev threw it over Margarita's
shoulders.
'Thank you, messire,' whispered Margarita with a questioning glance at
Woland. In reply he gave her a polite but apathetic smile. Black depression
at once swelled up in Margarita's heart. She felt herself cheated. No one
appeared to be going to offer her any reward for her services at the ball
and nobody made a move to prevent her going. Yet she realised quite well
that she had nowhere to go. A passing thought that she might have to go back
home brought on an inner convulsion of despair. Dared she ask about the
master, as Azazello had so temptingly suggested in the Alexander Gardens? '
No, never!' she said to herself.
'Goodbye, messire,' she said aloud, thinking : ' If only I can get out
of here, I'll make straight for the river and drown myself! '
'Sit down,' Woland suddenly commanded her. A change came over
Margarita's face and she sat down.
'Perhaps you'd like to say something in farewell? '
'Nothing, messire,' replied Margarita proudly, ' however, if you still
need me I am ready to do anything you wish. I am not at all tired and I
enjoyed the ball. If it had lasted longer I would have been glad to continue
offering my knee to be kissed by thousands more gallows-birds and
murderers.'
Margarita felt she was looking at Woland through a veil; her eyes had
filled with tears.
'Well said! ' boomed Woland in a terrifying voice. ' That was the
right answer! '
'The right answer! ' echoed Woland's retinue in unison. ' We have put
you to the test,' said Woland. ' You should never ask anyone for anything.
Never--and especially from those who are more powerful than yourself. They

will make the offer and they will give of their own accord. Sit down, proud
woman! ' Woland pulled the heavy dressing-gown from Margarita's back and she
again found herself sitting beside him on the bed. ' So, Margot,' Woland
went on, his voice softening. ' What do you want for having been my hostess
tonight? What reward do you want for having spent the night naked? What
price do you set on your bruised knee? What damages did you suffer at the
hands of my guests, whom just now you called gallows-birds? Tell me! You can
speak without constraint now, because it was I who made the offer.'
Margarita's heart began to knock, she sighed deeply and tried to think
of something.
'Come now, be brave! ' said Woland encouragingly. ' Use your
imagination! The mere fact of having watched the murder of that worn-out old
rogue of a baron is worth a reward, especially for a woman. Well? '
Margarita caught her breath. She was about to utter her secret wish
when she suddenly turned pale, opened her mouth and stared. ' Frieda! . . .
Frieda, Frieda! ' a sobbing, imploring voice cried in her ear. ' My name is
Frieda! ' and Margarita said, stuttering:
'Can I ask . . . for one thing? '
'Demand, don't ask, madonna mia,' replied Woland with an understanding
smile. ' You may demand one thing.'
With careful emphasis Woland repeated Margarita's own words : ' one
thing '.
Margarita sighed again and said :
'I want them to stop giving Frieda back the handkerchief she used to
stifle her baby.'
The cat looked up at the ceiling and sighed noisily, but said nothing,
obviously remembering the damage done to his ear.
'In view of the fact,' said Woland, smiling,' that the possibility of
your having taken a bribe from that idiot Frieda is, of course, excluded--it
would in any case have been unfitting to your queenly rank--I don't know
what to do. So there only remains one thing--to find yourself some rags and
use them to block up all the cracks in my bedroom.'
'What do you mean, messire? ' said Margarita, puzzled. ' I quite
agree, messire,' interrupted the cat. ' Rags--that's it! ' And the cat
banged its paw on the table in exasperation.
'I was speaking of compassion,' explained Woland, the gaze of his
fiery eye fixed on Margarita. ' Sometimes it creeps in through the narrowest
cracks. That is why I suggested using rags to block them up . . .'
'That's what I meant, too! ' exclaimed the cat, for safety's sake
edging away from Margarita and covering its pointed ears with paws smeared
in pink cream.
'Get out,' Woland said to the cat.
'I haven't had my coffee,' replied Behemoth. ' How can you expect me
to go yet? Surely you don't divide your guests into two grades on a festive
night like this, do you--first-grade and second-grade-fresh, in the words of
that miserable cheeseparing barman? '
'Shut up,' said Woland, then turning to Margarita enquired :
'To judge from everything about you, you seem to be a good person. Am
I right? '
'No,' replied Margarita forcefully. ' I know that I can only be frank
with you and I tell you frankly--I am headstrong. I only asked you about
Frieda because I was rash enough to give her a firm hope. She's waiting,
messire, she believes in my power. And if she's cheated I shall be in a
terrible position. I shall have no peace for the rest of my life. I can't
help it--it just happened.'
'That's quite understandable,' said Woland.
'So will you do it? ' Margarita asked quietly.
'Out of the question,' replied Woland. ' The fact is, my dear queen,
that there has been a slight misunderstanding. Each department must stick to
its own business. I admit that our scope is fairly wide, in fact it is much
wider than a number of very sharp-eyed people imagine . . .'
'Yes, much wider,' said the cat, unable to restrain itself and
obviously proud of its interjections.
'Shut up, damn you! ' said Woland, and he turned and went on to

Margarita. ' But what sense is there, I ask you, in doing something which is
the business of another department, as I call it? So you see I can't do it;
you must do it yourself.'
'But can I do it? '
Azazello squinted at Margarita, gave an imperceptible flick of his red
mop and sneered.
'That's just the trouble--to do it,' murmured Woland. He
had been turning the globe, staring at some detail on it, apparently
absorbed in something else while Margarita had been talking. ' Well, as to
Frieda . . .' Koroviev prompted her. ' Frieda! ' cried Margarita in a
piercing voice. The door burst open and a naked, dishevelled but completely
sober woman with ecstatic eyes ran into the room and stretched out her arms
towards Margarita, who said majestically :
'You are forgiven. You will never be given the handkerchief again.'
Frieda gave a shriek and fell spreadeagled, face downward on the floor
in front of Margarita. Woland waved his hand and Frieda vanished.
'Thank you. Goodbye,' said Margarita and rose to go. ' Now, Behemoth,'
said Woland, ' as tonight is a holiday we shan't take advantage of her for
being so impractical, shall we? ' He turned to Margarita. ' All right, that
didn't count, because I did nothing. What do you want for yourself? '
There was silence, broken by Koroviev whispering to Margarita:
'Madonna bellissima, this time I advise you to be more sensible. Or
your luck may run out.'
'I want you to give me back instantly, this minute, my lover --the
master,' said Margarita, her face contorted.
A gust of wind burst into the room, flattening the candle flames. The
heavy curtain billowed out, the window was flung open. and high above
appeared a full moon--not a setting moon, but the midnight moon. A dark
green cloth stretched from the wind-ow-sill to the floor and down it walked
Ivan's night visitor, the man who called himself the master. He was wearing
his hospital clothes--dressing-gown, slippers and the black cap from which
he was never parted. His unshaven face twitched in a grimace, he squinted
with fear at the candle flames and a flood of moonlight boiled around him.
Margarita recognised him at once, groaned, clasped her hands and ran
towards him. She kissed him on the forehead, the lips, pressed her face to
his prickly cheek and her long-suppressed tears streamed down her face. She
could only say, repeating it like a senseless refrain :
'It's you . . . it's you . . . it's you . . .'
The master pushed her away and said huskily :
'Don't cry, Margot, don't torment me, I'm very ill,' and he
grasped the windowsill as though preparing to jump out and
run away again. Staring round at the figures seated in the room
he cried : ' I'm frightened, Margot! I'm getting hallucinations
again . . .'
Stifled with sobbing, Margarita whispered, stammering :
'No, no ... don't be afraid . . . I'm here . . . I'm here . . .'
Deftly and unobtrusively Koroviev slipped a chair behind the
master. He collapsed into it and Margarita fell on her knees at
his side, where she grew calmer. In her excitement she had not
noticed that she was no longer naked and that she was now
wearing a black silk gown. The master's head nodded forward
and he stared gloomily at the floor.
'Yes,' said Woland after a pause, ' they have almost broken
him.' He gave an order to Koroviev :
'Now, sir, give this man something to drink.'
In a trembling voice Margarita begged the master :
'Drink it, drink it! Are you afraid? No, no, believe me,
they want to help you! '
The sick man took the glass and drank it, but his hand trembled,
he dropped the glass and it shattered on the floor.
'Ma^el tov!' Koroviev whispered to Margarita. ' Look, he's
coming to himself already.'
It was true. The patient's stare was less wild and distraught.
'Is it really you, Margot? asked the midnight visitor.

'Yes, it really is,' replied Margarita.
'More! ' ordered Woland.
When the master had drained the second glass his eyes were
fully alive and conscious. ' That's better,' said Woland with a slight
frown. ' Now we can talk. Who are you? '
'I am no one,' replied the master with a lopsided smile.
'Where have you just come from? '
'From the madhouse. I am a mental patient,' replied the visitor.
Margarita could not bear to hear this and burst into tears again. Then
she wiped her eyes and cried :
'It's terrible--terrible! He is a master, messire, I warn you! Cure
him--he's worth it! '
'You realise who I am, don't you? ' Woland asked. ' Do you know where
you are? '
'I know,' answered the master. 'My next-door neighbour in the madhouse
is that boy, Ivan Bezdomny. He told me about you.'
'Did he now! ' replied Woland. ' I had the pleasure of meeting that
young man at Patriarch's Ponds. He nearly drove me mad, trying to prove that
I didn't exist. But you believe in me, I hope? '
'I must,' said the visitor, ' although I would much prefer it if I
could regard you as a figment of my own hallucination. Forgive me,' added
the master, recollecting himself.
'By all means regard me as such if that makes you any happier,'
replied Woland politely.
'No, no! ' said Margarita with anxiety, shaking the master by the
shoulder. ' Think again! It really is him! '
'But I really am like a hallucination. Look at my profile in the
moonlight,' said Behemoth. The cat moved into a shaft of moonlight and was
going to say something else, but was told to shut up and only said :
'All right, all right, I'll be quiet. I'll be a silent hallucination.'
'Tell me, why does Margarita call you the master? ' enquired Woland.
The man laughed and said :
'An understandable weakness of hers. She has too high an opinion of a
novel that I've written.' • Which novel? '
'A novel about Pontius Pilate.'
Again the candle flames flickered and jumped and the crockery rattled
on the table as Woland gave a laugh like a clap of thunder. Yet no one was
frightened or shocked by the laughter; Behemoth even applauded.
'About what? About whom?' said Woland, ceasing to laugh. ' But that's
extraordinary! In this day and age? Couldn't you have chosen another
subject? Let me have a look.' Woland stretched out his hand palm uppermost.
'Unfortunately I cannot show it to you,' replied the master, ' because
I burned it in my stove.'
'I'm sorry but I don't believe you,' said Woland. ' You can't have
done. Manuscripts don't burn.' He turned to Behemoth and said : ' Come on.
Behemoth, give me the novel.'
The cat jumped down from its chair and wh.ere he had been sitting was a
pile of manuscripts. With a bow the cat handed the top copy to Woland.
Margarita shuddered and cried out, moved to tears :
'There's the manuscript! There it is! '
She flung herself at Woland's feet and cried ecstatically:
'You are all-powerful! '
Woland took it, turned it over, put it aside and turned, unsmiling, to
stare at the master. Without apparent cause the master had suddenly relapsed
into uneasy gloom ; he got up from his chair, wrung his hands and turning
towards the distant moon he started to tremble, muttering :
'Even by moonlight there's no peace for me at night. . . Why do they
torment me? Oh, ye gods . . .'
Margarita clutched his hospital dressing-gown, embraced him and moaned
tearfully :
'Oh God, why didn't that medicine do you any good? '
'Don't be upset,' whispered Koroviev, edging up to the master, '
another little glassful and I'll have one myself to keep you company . . .'
A glass winked in the moonlight. It began to work. The master sat down

again and his expression grew calmer.
'Well, that makes everything quite clear,' said Woland, tapping the
manuscript with his long finger.
'Quite clear,' agreed the cat, forgetting its promise to be a silent
hallucination. ' I see the gist of this great opus quite plainly now. What
do you say, Azazello? '
'I say,' drawled Azazello, ' that you ought to be drowned.'
'Be merciful, Azazello', the cat replied, ' and don't put such
thoughts into my master's head. I'd come and haunt you every night and
beckon you to follow me. How would you like that, Azazello? '
'Now Margarita,' said Woland, ' say whatever you wish to say.'
Margarita's eyes shone and she said imploringly to Woland :
'May I whisper to him? '
Woland nodded and Margarita leaned over the master's ear and whispered
something into it. Aloud, he replied :
'No, it's too late. I want nothing more out of life except to see you.
But take my advice and leave me, otherwise you will be destroyed with me.'
'No, I won't leave you,' replied Margarita, and to Woland she said: '
Please send us back to his basement in that street near the Arbat, light the
lamp again and make everything as it was before.'
The master laughed, and clasping Margarita's dishevelled head he said:
'Don't listen to this poor woman, messire! Somebody else is living in
that basement now and no one can turn back the clock.' He laid his cheek on
his mistress's head, embraced Margarita and murmured:
'My poor darling . . .'
'No one can turn the clock back, did you say? ' said Woland ' That's
true. But we can always try. Azazello! '
Immediately a bewildered man in his underclothes crashed through the
ceiling to the floor, with a suitcase in his hand and wearing a cap. Shaking
with fear, the man bowed.
'Is your name Mogarych? ' Azazello asked him.
'Aloysius Mogarych,' said the new arrival, trembling.
'Are you the man who lodged a complaint against this man ' --pointing
to the master--' after you had read an article about him by Latunsky, and
denounced him for harbouring illegal literature? ' asked Azazello.
The man turned blue and burst into tears of penitence.
'You did it because you wanted to get his flat, didn't you? ' said
Azazello in a confiding, nasal whine.
The cat gave a hiss of fury and Margarita, with a howl of:
'I'll teach you to thwart a witch! ' dug her nails into Aloysius
Mogarych's face.
There was a brisk scuffle.
'Stop it! ' cried the master in an agonised voice. ' Shame on you,
Margot! '
'I protest! There's nothing shameful in it! ' squeaked the cat.
Koroviev pulled Margarita away.
'I put in a bathroom . . .' cried Mogarych, his face streaming blood.
His teeth were chattering and he was babbling with fright. ' I gave it a
coat of whitewash . . .'
'What a good thing that you put in a bathroom,' said Azazello
approvingly. ' He'll be able to have baths now.' And he shouted at Mogarych
: ' Get out! '
The man turned head over heels and sailed out of the open window of
Woland's bedroom.
His eyes starting from his head, the master whispered :
'This beats Ivan's story! ' He stared round in amazement then said to
the cat: ' Excuse me, but are you . . .' he hesitated, not sure how one
talked to a cat: ' Are you the same cat who boarded the tramcar? '
'I am,' said the cat, flattered, and added : ' It's nice to hear
someone speak so politely to a cat. People usually address cats as " pussy
", which I regard as an infernal liberty.'
'It seems to me that you're not entirely a cat . . .' replied the
master hesitantly. ' The hospital people are bound to catch me again, you
know,' he added to Woland resignedly.

'Why should they?' said Koroviev reassuringly. Some papers and books
appeared in his hand : ' Is this your case-history? '
'Yes.. .'
Koroviev threw the case-history into the fire. ' Remove the
document--and you remove the man,' said Koroviev with satisfaction.
'And is this your landlord's rent-book? '
'Yes...'
'What is the tenant's name? Aloysius Mogarych? ' Koroviev blew on the
page. ' Hey presto! He's gone and, please note, he was never there. If the
landlord is surprised, tell him he was dreaming about Aloysius. Mogarych?
What Mogarych? Never heard of him! ' At this the rent-book evaporated from
Koro-viev's hands. ' Now it's back on the landlord's desk.'
'You were right,' said the master, amazed at Koroviev's efficiency, '
when you said that once you remove the document, you remove the man as well.
I no longer exist now--I have no papers.'
'Oh no, I beg your pardon,' exclaimed Koroviev. ' That is just another
hallucination. Here are your papers! ' He handed the master some documents,
then said with a wink to Margarita:
'And here is your property, Margarita Nikolayevna.' Koroviev handed
Margarita a manuscript-book with burnt edges, a dried rose, a photograph
and, with special care, a savings-bank book :
'The ten thousand that you deposited, Margarita Nikolayevna. We have
no use for other people's money.'
'May my paws drop off before I touch other people's money,' exclaimed
the cat, bouncing up and down on a suitcase to flatten the copies of the
ill-fated novel that were inside it.
'And a little document of yours,' Koroviev went on, handing Margarita
a piece of paper. Then turning to Woland he announced respectfully : ' That
is everything, messire.'
'No, it's not everything,' answered Woland, turning away from the
globe. ' What would you like me to do with your retinue, Madonna? I have no
need of them myself.' Natasha, stark naked, flew in at the open window and
cried to
Margarita : ' I hope you'll be very happy, Margarita Nikolay-evna! '
She nodded towards the master and went on : ' You see, I knew about it all
the time.'
'Servants know everything,' remarked the cat, wagging its paw sagely.
' It's a mistake to think they're blind.'
'What do you want, Natasha? ' asked Margarita. ' Go back home.'
'Dear Margarita Nikolayevna,' said Natasha imploringly and fell on her
knees, ' ask him,' she nodded towards Woland, ' to let me stay a witch. I
don't want to go back to that house! Last night at the ball Monsieur Jacques
made me an offer.' Natasha unclenched her fist and showed some gold coins.
Margarita looked enquiringly at Woland, who nodded. Natasha embraced
Margarita, kissed her noisily and with a triumphant cry flew out of the
window.
Natasha was followed by Nikolai Ivanovich. He had regained human form,
but was extremely glum and rather cross.
'Now here's someone I shall be especially glad to release,' said
Woland, looking at Nikolai Ivanovich with repulsion. ' I shall be delighted
to see the last of him.'
'Whatever you do, please give me a certificate,' said Nikolai
Ivanovich, anxiously but with great insistence, ' to prove where I was last
night.'
'What for? ' asked the cat sternly.
'To show to my wife and to the police,' said Nikolai Ivanovich firmly.
'We don't usually give certificates,' replied the cat frowning, ' but
as it's for you we'll make an exception.'
Before Nikolai Ivanovich knew what was happening, the naked Hella was
sitting behind a typewriter and the cat dictating to her.
'This is to certify that the Bearer, Nikolai Ivanovich, spent the
night in question at Satan's Ball, having been enticed there in a vehicular
capacity . . . Hella, put in brackets after that " (pig) ".
Signed--Behemoth.'

'What about the date? ' squeaked Nikolai Ivanovich.
'We don't mention the date, the document becomes invalid if it's
dated,' replied the cat, waving the piece of paper. Then the animal produced
a rubber stamp, breathed on it in the approved fashion, stamped ' Paid ' on
the paper and handed the document to Nikolai Ivanovich. He vanished without
trace, to be unexpectedly replaced by another man.
'Now who's this? ' asked Woland contemptuously, shielding his eyes
from the candlelight.
Varenukha hung his head, sighed and said in a low voice :
'Send me back, I'm no good as a vampire. Hella and I nearly frightened
Rimsky to death, but I'll never make a vampire--I'm just not bloodthirsty.
Please let me go.'
'What is he babbling about?' asked Woland, frowning. ' Who is this
Rimsky? What is all this nonsense? '
'Nothing to worry about, messire,' said Azazello and he turned to
Varenukha : ' Don't play the fool or tell lies on the telephone any more.
Understand? You're not going to, are you?.Overcome with relief, Varenukha beamed and stammered :
'Thank Go ... I mean . . . your may ... as soon as I've had my supper
. . .' He pressed his hand to his heart and gazed imploringly at Azazello.
'All right. Off you go home! ' said Azazello and Varenukha melted
away.
'Now all of you leave me alone with these two,' ordered Woland,
pointing to the master and Margarita.
Woland's command was obeyed instantly. After a silence he said to the
master :
'So you're going back to your basement near the Arbat. How will you be
able to write now? Where are your dreams, your inspiration? '
'I have no more dreams and my inspiration is dead,' replied the
master, ' nobody interests me any longer except her '--he laid his hand
again on Margarita's head--' I'm finished. My only wish is to return to that
basement.'
'And what about your novel? What about Pilate? '
'I hate that novel,' replied the master. ' I have been through too
much because of it.'
'Please,' begged Margarita piteously, ' don't talk like that. Whv are
you torturing me? You know I've put my whole life into your work,' and she
added, turning to Woland : ' Don't listen to him, messire, he has suffered
too much.'
'But won't you need to re-write some of it? ' asked Woland. ' Or if
you've exhausted your Procurator, why not write about somebody else--that
Aloysius, for instance . . .'
The master smiled.
'Lapshennikova would never print it and in any case that doesn't
interest me.'
'How will you earn your living, then? Won't you mind being poor? '
'Not a bit,' said the master, drawing Margarita to him. Embracing her
round the shoulders he added: ' She'll leave me when she comes to her
senses.'
'I doubt it,' said Woland, teeth clenched. He went on : 'So the
creator of Pontius Pilate proposes to go and starve in a basement? '
Margarita unlinked her arms from the master's and said passionately :
'I've done all I can. I whispered to him the most tempting thing of
all. And he refused.'
'I know what you whispered to him,' said Woland, ' but that is not
what tempts him most. Believe me,' he turned with a smile to the master, '
your novel has some more surprises in store for you.'
'What a grim prospect,' answered the master.
'No, it is not grim at all,' said Woland. ' Nothing terrible will come
of it, I assure you. Well now, Margarita Nikolayevna, everything is
arranged. Have you any further claims on me?'
'How can I, messire? '
'Then take this as a souvenir,' said Woland and took a small golden,
diamond-studded horseshoe from under a cushion.

'No--I couldn't take it. Haven't you done enough for me? ' ' Are you
arguing with me? ' asked Woland, smiling.
As Margarita had no pocket in her gown she wrapped the horseshoe in a
napkin and knotted it. Then something seemed to worry her. She looked out of
the window at the moon and said :
'One thing I don't understand--it still seems to be midnight.
Shouldn't it be morning? '
'It's pleasant to stop the clock on a festive night such as this,'
replied Woland. ' And now--good luck!'
Margarita stretched both hands to Woland in entreaty, but found she
could come no nearer to him.
'Goodbye! Goodbye!'
'Au revoir,' said Woland.
Margarita in her black cloak and the master in his hospital
dressing-gown walked out into the corridor of Berlioz's flat, where the
light was burning and Woland's retinue was waiting for them. As they passed
along the corridor Hella, helped by the cat, carried the suitcase with the
novel and Margarita Nikolayev-na's few belongings.
At the door of the flat Koroviev bowed and vanished, while the others
escorted them down the staircase. It was empty. As they passed the third
floor landing a faint bump was heard, but no one paid it any attention. At
the front door of staircase 6 Azazello blew into the air and as they entered
the dark courtyard they saw a man in boots and peaked cap sound asleep on
the doorstep and a large, black car standing by the entrance with dimmed
lights. Barely visible in the driver's seat was the outline of a crow.
Margarita was just about to sit down when she gave a stifled cry of
despair:
'Oh God, I've lost the horseshoe.'
'Get into the car,' said Azazello, ' and wait for me. I'll be back in
a moment as soon as I've looked into this.' He walked back through the
doorway.
What had happened was this: shortly before Margarita, the master and
their escort had left No. 50, a shrivelled woman carrying a bag and a tin
can had emerged from No. 48, the flat immediately below. It was Anna--the
same Anna who the previous Wednesday had spilt the sunflower-seed oil near
the turnstile with such disastrous consequences for Berlioz.
Nobody knew and no one probably ever will know what this woman was
doing in Moscow or what she lived on. She was to be seen every day either
with her tin can or her bag or both, sometimes at the oil-shop, sometimes at
the market, sometimes outside the block of flats or on the staircase, but
mostly in the kitchen of flat No. 48, where she lived. She was notorious for
being a harbinger of disaster wherever she went and she was nicknamed ' Anna
the Plague '.
Anna the Plague usually got up very early in the morning, but this
morning something roused her long before dawn, soon after midnight. Her key
turned in the door, her nose poked through and was followed by Anna herself,
who slammed the door behind her. She was just about to set off on some
errand when the door banged on the upstairs landing, a man came bounding
downstairs, crashed into Anna and knocked her sideways so hard that she hit
the back of her head against the wall.
'Where the hell do you think you're going like that--in your
underpants? ' whined Anna, rubbing the back of her head.
The man, who was wearing underclothes and a cap and carrying a
suitcase, answered in a sleepy voice with his eyes closed:
'Bath . . . whitewash . . . cost me a fortune . . .' and bursting into
tears he bellowed : ' I've been kicked out! '
Then he dashed off--not downstairs but upstairs again to where the
windowpane had been broken by Poplavsky's foot, and through it he glided
feet first out into the courtyard. Forgetting about her aching head, Anna
gasped and rushed up to the broken window. She lay flat on the landing floor
and stuck her head out in the courtyard, expecting to see the mortal remains
of the man with the suitcase lit up by the courtyard lamp. But there was
absolutely nothing to be seen on the courtyard pavement.
As far as Anna could tell, this weird sleepwalker had flown out of the

house like a bird, leaving not a trace. She crossed herself and thought: '
It's that No. 50! No wonder people say it's haunted . . .'
The thought had hardly crossed her mind before the door upstairs
slammed again and someone else came running down. Anna pressed herself to
the wall and saw a respectable looking gentleman with a little beard and, so
it seemed to her, a slightly piggish face, who slipped past her and like the
first man left the building through the window, also without hitting the
ground below. Anna had long since forgotten her original reason for coming
out, and stayed on the staircase, crossing herself, moaning and talking to
herself. After a short while a third man, with no beard but with a round
clean-shaven face and wearing a shirt, emerged and shot through the window
in turn.
To give Anna her due she was of an enquiring turn of mind and she
decided to wait and see if there were to be any further marvels. The
upstairs door opened again and a whole crowd started coming downstairs, this
time not running but walking like ordinary people. Anna ran down from the
window back to her own front door, quickly opened it, hid behind it and kept
her eye, wild with curiosity, fixed to the crack which she left open.
An odd sick-looking man, pale with a stubbly beard, in a black cap and
dressing-gown, was walking unsteadily downstairs, carefully helped by a lady
wearing what looked to Anna in the gloom like a black cassock. The lady was
wearing some transparent slippers, obviously foreign, but so torn and
shredded that she was almost barefoot. It was indecent--bedroom slippers and
quite obviously naked except for a black gown billowing out as she walked! '
That No. 50!' Anna's mind was already savouring the story she was going to
tell the neighbours tomorrow.
After this lady came a naked girl carrying a suitcase and helped by an
enormous black cat. Rubbing her eyes, Anna could barely help bursting into a
shriek of pure amazement. Last in the procession was a short, limping
foreigner with a wall eye, no jacket, a white evening-dress waistcoat and a
bow tie. Just as the whole party had filed downstairs past Anna's door,
something fell on to the landing with a gentle thump.
When the sound of footsteps had died away, Anna wriggled out of her
doorway like a snake, put down her tin can, dropped on to her stomach and
started groping about on the landing floor. Suddenly she found herself
holding something heavy wrapped in a table-napkin. Her eyes started from her
head as she untied the napkin and lifted the jewel close to eyes that burned
with a wolfish greed. A storm of thoughts whirled round her mind:
'See no sights and tell no tales! Shall I take it to my nephew? Or
split it up into pieces? I could ease the stones out and sell them off one
at a time. . . .'
Anna hid her find in the front of her blouse, picked up her tin can and
was just about to abandon her errand and slip back indoors when she was
suddenly confronted by the coatless man with the white shirtfront, who
whispered to her in a soft voice :
'Give me that horseshoe wrapped in a serviette! '
'What serviette? What horseshoe? ' said Anna, prevaricating with great
skill. ' Never seen a serviette. What's the matter with you--drunk? '
Without another word but with fingers as hard and as cold as the
handrail of a bus, the man in the white shirtfront gripped Anna's throat so
tightly that he prevented all air from entering her lungs. The tin can fell
from her hand. Having stopped Anna from breathing for a while, the
jacketless stranger removed his fingers from her neck. Gasping for breath,
Anna smiled.
'Oh, you mean the little horseshoe? ' she said. ' Of course! Is it
yours? I looked and there it was wrapped in a serviette, I picked it up on
purpose in case anybody else might find it and vanish with it! '
With the horseshoe in his possession again, the stranger began bowing
and scraping to Anna, shook her by the hand and thanked her warmly in a
thick foreign accent:
'I am most deeply grateful to you, madame. This horseshoe is dear to
me as a memory. Please allow me to give you two hundred roubles for saving
it.' At which he pulled the money from his waistcoat pocket and gave it to
Anna, who could only exclaim with a bewildered grin :

'Oh, thank you so much! Merci!'
In one leap the generous stranger had jumped down a whole flight of
stairs, but before vanishing altogether he shouted up at her, this time
without a trace of an accent:
'Next time you find someone else's things, you old witch, hand it in
to the police instead of stuffing it down your front! '
Utterly confused by events and by the singing in her ears, Anna could
do nothing for a long time but stand on the staircase and croak: ' Mem!
Merci! ' until long after the stranger had vanished.
Having returned Woland's present to Margarita, Azazello said goodbye to
her, enquiring if she was comfortably seated ; Hella gave her a smacking
kiss and the cat pressed itself affectionately to her hand. With a wave to
the master as he lowered himself awkwardly into his seat and a wave to the
crow, the party vanished into thin air, without bothering to return indoors
and walk up the staircase. The crow switched on the headlights and drove out
of the courtyard past the man asleep at the entrance. Finally the lights of
the big black car were lost as they merged into the rows of streetlamps on
silent, empty Sadovaya Street.
An hour later Margarita was sitting, softly weeping from shock and
happiness, in the basement of the little house in one of the sidestreets off
the Arbat. In the master's study all was as it had been before that terrible
autumn night of the year before. On the table, covered with a velvet cloth,
stood a vase of lily-of-the-valley and a shaded lamp. The charred
manuscript-book lay in front of her, beside it a pile of undamaged copies.
The house was silent. Next door on a divan, covered by his hospital
dressing-gown, the master lay in a deep sleep, his regular breathing
inaudible from the next room.
Drying her tears, Margarita picked up one of the unharmed folios and
found the place that she had been reading before she had met Azazello
beneath the Kremlin wall. She had no wish to sleep. She smoothed the
manuscript tenderly as one strokes a favourite cat and turning it over in
her hands she inspected it from every angle, stopping now on the title page,
now at the end. A fearful thought passed through her mind that it was
nothing more than a piece of wizardry, that the folio might vanish from
sight, that she would wake up and find that she was in her bedroom at home
and it was time to get up and stoke the boiler. But this was only a last
terrible fantasy, the echo of long-borne suffering. Nothing vanished, the
all-powerful Woland really was all-powerful and Margarita was able to leaf
through the manuscript to her heart's content, till dawn if she wanted to,
stare at it, kiss it and re-read the words :
'The mist that came from the Mediterranean sea blotted out the city
that Pilate so detested . . .'

27. How the Procurator Tried to Save Judas of Karioth

The mist that came from the Mediterranean sea blotted out the city that
Pilate so detested. The suspension bridges connecting the temple with the
grim fortress of Antonia vanished, the murk descended from the sky and
drowned the winged gods above the hippodrome, the crenellated Hasmonaean
palace, the bazaars, the caravanserai, the alleyways, the pools . . .
Jerusalem, the great city, vanished as though it had never been. The mist
devoured everything, frightening every living creature in Jerusalem and its
surroundings. The city was engulfed by a strange cloud which had crept over
it from the sea towards the end of that day, the fourteenth of the month of
Nisan.
It had emptied its belly over Mount Golgotha, where the executioners
had hurriedly despatched their victims, it had flowed over the temple of
Jerusalem, pouring down in smoky cascades from the mound of the temple and

invading the Lower City. It had rolled through open windows and driven
people indoors from the winding streets. At first it held back its rain and
only spat lightning, the flame cleaving through the smoking black vapour,
lighting up the great pile of the temple and its glittering, scaly roof. But
the flash passed in a moment and the temple was plunged again into an abyss
of darkness. Several times it loomed through the murk to vanish again and
each time its disappearance was accompanied by a noise like the crack of
doom.
Other shimmering flashes lit up the palace of Herod the Great facing
the temple on the western hill; as they did so the golden statues, eyeless
and fearful, seemed to leap up into the black sky and stretch their arms
towards it. Then the fire from heaven would be quenched again and a great
thunderclap would banish the gilded idols into the mist.
The rainstorm burst suddenly and the storm turned into a hurricane. On
the very spot near a marble bench in the garden, where that morning the
Procurator had spoken to the High Priest, a thunderbolt snapped the trunk of
a cypress as though it had been a twig. With the water vapour and the hail,
the balcony under the arcade was swept with torn rose-heads, magnolia
leaves, small branches and sand as the hurricane scourged the garden.
At the moment when the storm broke only the Procurator was left beneath
the arcade.
He was no longer sitting in a chair but lying on a couch beside a small
low table laid with food and jugs of wine. Another, empty, couch stood on
the far side of the table. An untidy, blood-red puddle lay spread out at the
Procurator's feet amid the sherds of a broken jug. The servant who had laid
the Procurator's table had been so terrified by his look and so nervous at
his apparent displeasure that the Procurator had lost his temper with him
and smashed the jug on the mosaic floor, saying:
'Why don't you look me in the eyes when you serve me? Have you stolen
something? '
The African's black face turned grey, mortal terror came into his eyes
and he trembled so much that he almost broke another jug, but the Procurator
waved him away and the slave ran off, leaving the pool of spilt wine.
As the hurricane struck, the African hid himself in a niche beside a
statue of a white, naked woman with bowed head, afraid to show himself too
soon yet frightened of missing the call should the Procurator summon him.
Lying on his couch in the half-darkness of the storm the Procurator
poured out his own wine, drank it in long gulps, stretching out his arm for
an occasional piece of bread which he crumbled and ate in little pieces. Now
and again he would swallow an oyster, chew a slice of lemon and drink again.
Without the roar of water, without the claps of thunder which seemed to be
about to smash the palace roof, without the crash of hail that hammered on
the steps leading up to the balcony, a listener might have heard the
Procurator muttering as he talked to himself. And if the momentary flashes
of lightning had shone with a steady light an observer might have noticed
that the Procurator's face, the eyes inflamed with insomnia and wine, showed
impatience ; that the Procurator's glance was not only taken up by the two
yellow roses drowning in the red puddle, but that he was constantly turning
his face towards the garden, towards the water-lashed sand and mud; that he
was expecting someone, waiting impatiently.
A little time passed and the veil of water in front of the Procurator
began to thin out. The storm, though still furious, was abating. No more
branches creaked and fell. The lightning and thunder grew more infrequent.
The cloud hovering over Jerusalem was no longer violet edged with white but
a normal grey, the rearguard of the storm that was now moving onwards
towards the Dead Sea.
Soon the sound of the rain could be distinguished from the noise of
water running down the gutters and on to the staircase down which the
Procurator had walked to the square to pronounce sentence. At last even the
tinkle of the fountain, drowned until now, could be heard. It grew lighter.
Windows of blue began to appear in the grey veil as it fled eastward.
Then from far away, above the weak patter of rain, the Procurator heard
faint trumpet-calls and the tattoo of several score of horses' hooves. The
sound caused the Procurator to stir and his expression to liven. The ala was

returning from Mount Golgotha. To judge from the sound, they were just
crossing the hippodrome square.
At last the Procurator heard the long-awaited footsteps and the slap of
shoe-leather on the staircase leading to the upper terrace of the garden in
front of the balcony. The Procurator craned his neck and his eyes shone
expectantly.
Between the two marble lions there appeared first the cowled
head, then the figure of a man closely wrapped in his soaking wet
cloak. It was the same man with whom the Procurator, before pronouncing
sentence, had held a whispered conference in a darkened room of the palace,
and who had watched the execution as he played with a stick seated on a
three-legged stool.
Walking straight through the puddles, the cowled man crossed the
terrace, crossed the mosaic floor of the balcony, and raising his hand said
in a pleasant, high-pitched voice :
'Hail, Procurator! ' The visitor spoke in Latin.
'Gods! ' exclaimed Pilate. ' There's not a dry stitch on you!' What a
storm! Please go to my room at once and change.'
The man pushed back his cowl, revealing a completely wet head with the
hair plastered down over his forehead. With a polite smile on his
clean-shaven face he declined the offer of a change of clothing, assuring
the Procurator that a little rain would do him no harm.
'I won't hear of it,' replied Pilate. He clapped his hands, summoning
his cowering servant, and ordered him to help the visitor to change and then
to bring him some hot food.
The Procurator's visitor needed only a short while to dry his hair,
change his clothes, his footgear, and tidy himself up, and he soon
reappeared on the balcony in dry sandals, in a purple army cloak and with
his hair combed.
At that moment the sun returned to Jerusalem and before setting in the
Mediterranean it sent its parting rays over the Procurator's hated city and
gilded the balcony steps. The fountain was now playing again at full
strength, pigeons had landed on the terrace, cooing and hopping between the
broken twigs and pecking at the sand. The red puddle was mopped up, the
fragments removed, a steaming plateful of meat was set on the table.
'I await the Procurator's orders,' said the visitor as he approached
the table.
'Forget about my orders until you have sat down and drunk your wine,'
answered Pilate kindly, pointing to the other couch.
The man reclined, the servant poured some thick red wine into his cup.
Another servant, bending cautiously over Pilate's shoulder, filled the
Procurator's cup, after which he dismissed them both with a gesture.
While the visitor ate and drank Pilate sipped his wine and watched his
guest through narrowed eyes. The man was middle-aged with very pleasant,
neat, round features and a fleshy nose. The colour of his hair was vague,
though its colour lightened as it dried out. His nationality was hard to
guess. His main feature was a look of good nature, which was belied by his
eyes --or rather not so much by his eyes as by a peculiar way of looking at
the person facing him. Usually the man kept his small eyes shielded under
eyelids that were curiously enlarged, even swollen. At these moments the
chinks in his eyelids showed nothing but mild cunning, the look of a man
with a sense of humour. But there were times when the man who was now the
Procurator's guest opened his eyelids wide and gave a person a sudden,
unwavering stare as though to search out an inconspicuous spot on his nose.
It only lasted a moment, after which the lids dropped, the eyes narrowed
again and they shone with goodwill and sly intelligence.
The visitor accepted a second cup of wine, swallowed a few oysters with
obvious relish, tasted the boiled vegetables and ate a piece of meat. When
he had eaten his fill he praised the wine :
'An excellent vintage. Procurator--is it Falernian? '
'Cecuba--thirty years old,' replied the Procurator amiably.
The visitor placed his hand on his heart and declined the offer of more
to eat, saying that he had had enough. Pilate refilled his own cup and his
guest did the same. The two men each poured a libation into the dish of meat

and the Procurator, raising his cup, said in a loud voice :
'To thee, 0 Caesar, father of thy people, best and most beloved of
men.'
Both drank their wine to its dregs and the Africans cleared the dishes
from the table, leaving fruit and jugs of wine. The Procurator dismissed the
servants, and was left alone with his visitor under the arcade.
'So,' began Pilate quietly, ' what have you to tell me of the mood of
the city? ' Involuntarily he turned his glance downwards to where, past the
terraces of the garden, the colonnades and flat roofs glowed in the golden
rays of the setting sun.
'I believe, Procurator,' said his visitor, ' that the mood of
Jerusalem can now be regarded as satisfactory.'
'So I can rely on there being no further disorders? '
'One can only rely,' Arthanius replied with a reassuring glance at the
Procurator, ' on one thing in this world--on the power of great Caesar.'
'May the gods send him long life! ' Pilate said fervently, ' And
universal peace! ' He was silent for a moment then went on : ' What do you
think--can we withdraw the troops now? '
'I think the cohort from the Lightning can be sent away,' replied the
visitor, and added : ' It would be a good idea if it were to parade through
the city before leaving.'
'A very good idea,' said the Procurator approvingly. ' I shall order
it away the day after tomorrow. I shall also go myself and--I swear to you
by the feast of the twelve gods, I swear by the Lares--I would have given a
lot to have been able to do so today!'
'Does the Procurator not like Jerusalem?' enquired the visitor
amicably.
'Merciful heavens! ' exclaimed the Procurator, smiling. ' It's the
most unsettling place on earth. It isn't only the climate-- I'm ill every
time I have to come here--that's only half the trouble. But these festivals!
Magicians, sorcerers, wizards, the hordes of pilgrims. Fanatics--all of
them. And what price this messiah of theirs, which they're expecting this
year? Every moment there's likely to be some act of gratuitous bloodshed. I
spend all my time shuffling the troops about or reading denunciations and
complaints, half of which are directed at you. You must admit it's boring.
Oh, if only I weren't in the imperial service! '
'Yes, the festivals here are trying times,' agreed the visitor.
'I wish with all my heart that this one was over,' said Pilate
forcibly. ' Then I can go back to Caesarea. Do you know, this lunatic
building of Herod's'--the Procurator waved at the arcade, embracing the
whole palace in a gesture--' is positively driving me out of my mind. I
can't bear sleeping in it. It is the most extraordinary piece of
architecture in the world . . . However, to business. First of all--is that
cursed Bar-Abba giving you any trouble? '
At this the visitor directed his peculiar stare at the Procurator, but
Pilate was gazing wearily into the distance, frowning with distaste and
contemplating the quarter of the city which lay at his feet, fading into the
dusk. The visitor's glance also faded and his eyelids lowered again.
'I think that Bar is now as harmless as a lamb,' said the visitor, his
round face wrinkling. ' He is hardly in a position to make trouble now.'
'Too busy? ' asked Pilate, smiling.
'The Procurator, as usual, has put the point with great finesse.'
'But at all events,' remarked the Procurator anxiously and raised a
long, thin finger adorned with a black stone,' we must...'
'The Procurator may rest assured that as long as I am in Judaea Bar
will not move a step without my being on his heels.'
'That is comforting. I am always comforted when you are here.'
'The Procurator is too kind.'
'Now tell me about the execution,' said Pilate.
'What interests the Procurator in particular? '
'Chiefly, whether there were any attempts at insurrection from the
mob?'
'None,' answered the visitor.
'Good. Did you personally confirm that they were dead? '

'Of that the Procurator may be sure.'
'And tell me ... were they given a drink before being gibbeted?'
'Yes. But he '--the visitor closed his eyes--' refused to drink.' '
Who did? ' asked Pilate.
'I beg your pardon, hegemon! ' exclaimed the visitor. ' Didn't I say?
Ha-Notsri! '
'Madman! ' said Pilate, grimacing. A vein twitched under his left eye.
' To die of sunstroke! Why refuse what the law provides for? How did he
refuse? '
'He said,' replied the guest, shutting his eyes again, ' that he was
grateful and blamed no one for taking his life.'
'Whom did he thank? ' asked Pilate in a low voice.
'He did not say, hegemon . . .'
'He didn't try to preach to the soldiers, did he? '
'No, hegemon, he was not very loquacious on this occasion. His only
words were that he regarded cowardice as one of the worst human sins.'
'What made him say that? ' The Procurator's voice suddenly trembled.
'I have no idea. His behaviour was in any case strange, as it always
has been.'
'In what way strange? '
'He kept staring at individuals among the people standing around him,
and always with that curiously vague smile on his face.'
'Nothing more? ' asked the husky voice.
'Nothing more.'
The jug clattered against his cup as the Procurator poured himself some
more wine. Having drained it he said :
'My conclusion is as follows : although we have not been able--at
least not at present--to find any followers or disciples of his, we
nevertheless cannot be certain that he had none,'
The visitor nodded, listening intently.
'Therefore to avoid any untoward consequences,' the Procurator went
on, ' please remove the three victims' bodies from the face of the earth,
rapidly and without attracting attention. Bury them secretly and silently so
that nothing more is heard of them.'
'Very good, hegemon,' said the visitor. He stood up and said: ' As
this matter is important and will present certain difficulties, may I have
your permission to go at once? '
'No, sit down again,' said Pilate, restraining his visitor with a
gesture. ' I have a couple more questions to ask you. Firstly-- your
remarkable diligence in carrying out your task as chief of the secret
service to the Procurator makes it my pleasant duty to mention it in a
report to Rome.'
The visitor blushed as he rose, bowed to the Procurator and said:
'I am only doing my duty as a member of the imperial service.'
'But,' said the hegemon, ' if you are offered promotion and transfer
to another post, I should like to ask you to refuse it and stay here. I do
not wish to be parted from you on any account. I shall see to it that you
are rewarded in other ways.'
'I am happy to serve under you, hegemon.'
'I am very glad to hear it. Now for the second question. It concerns
that man . . . what's his name? . . . Judas of Karioth.'
At this the visitor again gave the Procurator his open-eyed glance,
then, as was fitting, hooded his eyes again.
'They say,' the Procurator went on, lowering his voice, ' that he is
supposed to have been paid for the way he took that idiot home and made him
so welcome.'
'Will be paid,' corrected the visitor gently.
'How much? '
'No one can tell, hegemon.'
'Not even you? ' said the hegemon, praising the man by his surprise.
'Alas, not even I,' replied the visitor calmly. ' But I do know that
he will be paid this evening. He has been summoned to Caiaphas' palace
today.'
'Ah, he must be greedy, that old man from Karioth! ' said the

Procurator with a smile. ' I suppose he is an old man, isn't he?'
'The Procurator is never mistaken, but on this occasion he has been
misinformed,' replied the man kindly. ' This man from Karioth is a young
man.'
'Really? Can you describe him? Is he a fanatic? '
'Oh no, Procurator.'
'I see. What else do you know about him? '
'He is very good-looking.'
'What else? Has he perhaps a special passion? '
'It is hard to know so much with certainty in this huge city,
Procurator.'
'Come now, Arthanius! You underestimate yourself.'
'He has one passion. Procurator.' The visitor made a tiny pause. ' He
has a passion for money.'
'What is his occupation? '
Arthanius looked up, reflected and answered :
'He works for one of his relatives who has a money-changer's booth.'
'I see, I see.' The Procurator was silent, looked round to make sure
that there was no one on the balcony and then said in a low voice : ' The
fact is--I have received information that he is to be murdered tonight.'
At this the visitor not only turned his glance on the Procurator but
held it for a while and then replied :
'You have nattered me. Procurator, but I fear I have not earned your
commendation. I have no such information.'
'You deserve the highest possible praise,' replied the Procurator, '
but there is no doubting this information.'
'May I ask its source? '
'You must allow me not to divulge that for the present, particularly
as it is casual, vague and unreliable. But it is my duty to allow for every
eventuality. I place great reliance on my instinct in these matters, because
it has never failed me yet. The information is that one of Ha-Notsri's
secret followers, revolted by this money-changer's monstrous treachery, has
plotted with his confederates to kill the man tonight and to return his
blood-money to the High Priest with a note reading :
" Take back your accursed money! " ' The chief of the secret service
gave the hegemon no more of his startling glances and listened, frowning, as
Pilate continued :
'Do you think the High Priest will be pleased at such a gift on
Passover night? '
'Not only will he not be pleased,' replied the visitor with a smile, '
but I think. Procurator, that it will create a major scandal.'
'I think so too. That is why I am asking you to look after the affair
and take all possible steps to protect Judas of Karioth.'
'The hegemon's orders will be carried out,' said Arthanius, ' but I
can assure the hegemon that these villains have set themselves a very
difficult task. After all, only think '--the visitor glanced round as he
spoke--' they have to trace the man, kill him, then find out how much money
he received and return it to Caiaphas by stealth. All that in one night?
Today? '
'Nevertheless he will be murdered tonight,' Pilate repeated firmly. '
I have a presentiment, I tell you! And it has never yet played me false.' A
spasm crossed the Procurator's face and he rubbed his hands.
'Very well,' said the visitor obediently. He rose, straightened up and
suddenly said coldly :
'You say he will be murdered, hegemon? '
'Yes,' answered Pilate, ' and our only hope is your extreme
efficiency.'
The visitor adjusted the heavy belt under his cloak and said:
'Hail and farewell, Procurator! '
'Ah, yes,' cried Pilate, ' I almost forgot. I owe you some money.'
The visitor looked surprised.
'I am sure you do not. Procurator.'
'Don't you remember? When I arrived in Jerusalem there was a crowd of
beggars, I wanted to throw them some money, I had none and borrowed from

you.'
'But Procurator, that was a trifle! '
'One should remember trifles.' Pilate turned, lifted a cloak lying on
a chair behind him, picked up a leather purse from
beneath it and handed it to Arthanius. The man bowed, took the purse
and put it under his cloak.
'I expect,' said Pilate, ' a report on the burial and on the matter of
Judas of Karioth tonight, do you hear, Arthanius, tonight. The guards will
be given orders to wake me as soon as you appear. I shall be waiting for
you.'
'Very well,' said the chief of the secret service and walked out on to
the balcony. For a while Pilate could hear the sound of wet sand under his
feet, then the clatter of his sandals on the marble paving between the two
stone lions. Then legs, torso and finally cowl disappeared. Only then did
the Procurator notice that the sun had set and twilight had come.

26. The Burial

It may have been the twilight which seemed to cause such a sharp change
in the Procurator's appearance. He appeared to have aged visibly and he
looked hunched and worried. Once he glanced round and shuddered, staring at
the empty chair with his cloak thrown over its back. The night of the feast
was approaching, the evening shadows were playing tricks and the exhausted
Procurator may have thought he had seen someone sitting in the chair. In a
moment of superstitious fear the Procurator shook the cloak, then walked
away and began pacing the balcony, occasionally rubbing his hands, drinking
from the goblet on the table, or halting to stare unseeingly at the mosaic
floor as though trying to decipher some writing in it.
For the second time that day a brooding depression overcame him. Wiping
his brow, where he felt only a faintly nagging memory of the hellish pain
from that morning, the Procurator racked his brain in an attempt to define
the cause of his mental agony. He soon realised what it was, but unable to
face it, he tried to deceive himself. It was clear to him that this morning
he had irretrievably lost something and now he was striving to compensate
for that loss with a trivial substitute, which took the form of belated
action. His self-deception consisted in trying to persuade himself that his
actions this evening were no less significant than the sentence which he had
passed earlier in the day. But in this attempt the Procurator had little
success.
At one of his turns he stopped abruptly and whistled. In reply there
came a low bark from the twilight shadows and a gigantic grey-coated dog
with pointed ears bounded in from the garden, wearing a gold-studded collar.
'Banga, Banga,' cried the Procurator weakly.
The dog stood up on its hind legs, put its forepaws on its master's
shoulders, almost knocking him over, and licked his cheek. The Procurator
sat down in a chair. Banga, tongue hanging out and panting fast, lay down at
Pilate's feet with an expression of delight that the thunderstorm was over,
the only thing in the world that frightened this otherwise fearless animal;
delighted, too, because it was back again with the man it loved, respected
and regarded as the most powerful being on earth, the ruler of all men,
thanks to whom the dog too felt itself a specially privileged and superior
creature. But lying at his feet and gazing into the twilit garden without
even looking at Pilate the dog knew at once that its master was troubled. It
moved, got up, went round to Pilate's side and laid its forepaws and head on
the Procurator's knees, smearing the hem of his cloak with wet sand. Banga's
action seemed to mean that he wanted to comfort his master and was prepared
to face misfortune with him. This he tried to express in his eyes and in the

forward set of his ears. These two, dog and man who loved each other, sat in
vigil together on the balcony that night of the feast.
Meanwhile Arthanius was busy. Leaving the upper terrace of the garden,
he walked down the steps to the next terrace and turned right towards the
barracks inside the palace grounds. These quarters housed the two centuries
who had accompanied the Procurator to Jerusalem for the feast-days, together
with the Procurator's secret bodyguard commanded by Arthanius. He spent a
little while in the barracks, no longer than ten minutes, but immediately
afterwards three carts drove out of the barrack yard loaded with entrenching
tools and a vat of water, and escorted by a section of fifteen mounted men
wearing grey cloaks. Carts and escort left the palace grounds by a
side-gate, set off westward, passed through a gateway in the city wall and
first took the Bethlehem road northward; they reached the crossroads by the
Hebron gate and there turned on to the Jaffa road, along the route taken by
the execution party that morning. By now it was dark and the moon had risen
on the horizon.
Soon after the carts and their escort section had set off, Ar-thanius
also left the palace on horseback, having changed into a shabby black
chiton, and rode into the city. After a while he could have been seen riding
towards the fortress of Antonia, situated immediately north of the great
temple. The visitor spent an equally short time in the fortress, after which
his route took him to the winding, crooked streets of the Lower City. He had
now changed his mount to a mule.
Thoroughly at home in the city, the man easily found the street he was
looking for. It was known as the street of the Greeks, as it contained a
number of Greek shops, including one that sold carpets. There the man
stopped his mule, dismounted and tethered it to a ring outside the gate. The
shop was shut. The guest passed through a wicket gate in the wall beside the
shop door and entered a small rectangular courtyard, fitted out as a
stables. Turning the corner of the yard the visitor reached the ivy-grown
verandah of the owner's house and looked round him. House and stables were
dark, the lamps not yet lit. He called softly:
'Niza!'
At the sound of his voice a door creaked and a young woman, her head
uncovered, appeared on the verandah in the evening dusk. She leaned over the
railings, looking anxiously to see who had arrived. Recognising the visitor,
she gave him a welcoming smile, nodded and waved.
'Are you alone? ' asked Arthanius softly in Greek. ' Yes, I am,'
whispered the woman on the verandah. ' My husband went to Caesarea this
morning '--here the woman glanced at the door and added in a whisper--' but
the servant is here.' Then she beckoned him to come in.
Arthanius glanced round, mounted the stone steps and went indoors with
the woman. Here he spent no more than five minutes, after which he left the
house, pulled his cowl lower over his eyes and went out into the street. By
now candles were being lit in all the houses, there was a large feast-day
crowd in the streets, and Arthanius on his mule was lost in the stream of
riders and people on foot. Where he went from there is unknown.
When Arthanius had left her, the woman called Niza began to change in a
great hurry, though despite the difficulty of finding the things she needed
in her dark room she lit no candle and did not call her servant. Only when
she was ready, with a black shawl over her head, did she say :
'If anybody asks for me tell them that I've gone to see Enanta.'
Out of the dark her old serving-woman grumbled in reply :
'Enanta? Thait woman! You know your husband's forbidden you to see
her. She's nothing but a procuress, that Enanta of yours. I'll tell your
husband . . .'
'Now, now, now, be quiet,' retorted Niza and slipped out of doors like
a shadow, her sandals clattering across the paved courtyard. Still
grumbling, the servant shut the verandah door and Niza left her house.
At the same time a young man left a tumbledown little house with its
blind side to the street and whose only windows gave on to the courtyard,
and passed through the wicket into an unpaved alley that descended in steps
to one of the city's pools. He wore a white kefiyeh falling to his
shoulders, a new dark-blue fringed tallith fo:r the feast-day, and creaking

new sandals. Dressed up for the occasion, the handsome, hook-nosed young man
set off boldly, overtaking passers-by as he hurried home to the solemn
Passover-night table, watching the candles as they were lit in house after
house. The young man took the road leading past the bazaar towards the
palace of Caiaphas the High Priest at the foot of the temple hill.
After a while he entered the gates of Caiaphas' palace and left it a
short time later.
Leaving the palace, already bright with candles and torches and festive
bustle,, the young man returned, with an even bolder and more cheerful step,
to the Lower City. At the corner where the street joined the bazaar square,
he was passed in the seething crowd by a woman walking with the hip-swinging
gait of a prostitute and wearing a black shawl low over her eyes. As she
overtook him the woman raised her shawl slightly and flashed a glance in the
young man's direction, but instead of slowing down she walked faster as
though trying to run away from him.
The young man not only noticed the woman but recognised her. He gave a
start, halted, stared perplexedly at her back and at once set off to catch
her up. Almost knocking over a man carrying a jug, the young man drew level
with the woman and panting with agitation called out to her :
'Niza! '
The woman turned, frowned with a look of chilling irritation and coldly
replied in Greek :
'Oh, it's you, Judas. I didn't recognise you. Still, it's lucky. We
have a saying that if you don't recognise a person he's going to be rich. .
. .'
So excited that his heart began to leap like a wild bird in a cage,
Judas asked in a jerky whisper, afraid that the passers-by might hear:
'Where are you going, Niza? '
'Why do you want to know? ' answered Niza, slackening her pace and
staring haughtily at Judas.
In a childish, pleading voice Judas whispered distractedly :
'But Niza ... we agreed ... I was to come to see you, you said you'd
be at home all evening . . .'
'Oh no,' replied Niza, pouting capriciously, which to Judas made her
face, the most beautiful he had ever seen in the world, even prettier, ' I'm
bored. It's a feast-day for you, but what do you expect me to do? Sit and
listen to you sighing on the verandah? And always frightened of the servant
telling my husband? No, I've decided to go out of town and listen to the
nightingales.'
'Out of town? ' asked Judas, bewildered. ' What--alone? ' ' Yes, of
course,' replied Niza.
'Let me go with you,' whispered Judas with a sigh. His mind was
confused, he had forgotten about everything and he gazed pleadingly into
Niza's blue eyes that now seemed black in the darkness. Niza said nothing
but walked faster.
'Why don't you say something, Niza? ' asked Judas miserably, hastening
to keep pace with her.
'Won't I be bored with you? ' Ni2a asked suddenly and stopped. Judas
now felt utterly hopeless.
'All right,' said Niza, relenting at last. ' Come on!'
'Where to? '
'Wait. . . let's go into this courtyard and arrange it, otherwise I'm
afraid of someone seeing me and then telling my husband that I was out on
the streets with my lover.'
Niza and Judas vanished from the bazaar and began whispering under the
gateway of a courtyard.
'Go to the olive-grove,' whispered Niza, pulling her shawl down over
her eyes and turning away from a man who came into the courtyard carrying a
bucket, ' in Gethsemane, over Kedron, do you know where I mean? '
'Yes, yes . . .'
'I'll go first,' Niza went on, ' but don't follow close behind me, go
separately. I'll go ahead. . . . When you've crossed the stream ... do you
know where the grotto is? '
'Yes, I know, I know . . .'

'Go on through the olive grove on the hill and then turn right towards
the grotto. I'll be there. But whatever you do, don't follow me at once, be
patient, wait a while here.' With these words Niza slipped out of the
gateway as though she had never spoken to Judas.
Judas stood alone for some time, trying to collect his whirling
thoughts. Among other things he tried to think how he would explain his
absence from the Passover table to his parents. He stood and tried to work
out some lie, but in his excitement his mind refused to function properly,
and still lacking an excuse he slowly walked out of the gateway.
Now he took another direction and instead of making for the Lower City
he turned back towards the palace of Caiaphas. The celebrations had already
begun. From windows on all sides came the murmur of the Passover ceremony.
Latecomers hastening home urged on their donkeys, whipping them and shouting
at them. On foot Judas hurried on, not noticing the menacing turrets of the
fortress of Antonia, deaf to the call of trumpets from the fortress,
oblivious of the Roman mounted patrol with their torches that threw an
alarming glare across his path.
As he turned past the fortress Judas saw that two gigantic
seven-branched candlesticks had been lit at a dizzy height above the temple.
But he only saw them in a blur. They seemed like dozens of lamps that burned
over Jerusalem in rivalry with the single lamp climbing high above the
city--the moon.
Judas had no thought for anything now but his urgent haste to leave the
city as quickly as possible by the Gethsemane gate. Occasionally he thought
he could see, among the backs and faces of the people in front of him, a
figure dancing along and drawing him after it. But it was an illusion. Judas
realised that Niza must be well ahead of him. He passed a row of
moneychangers' shops and at last reached the Gethsemane gate. Here, burning
with impatience, he was forced to wait. A camel caravan was coming into the
city, followed by a mounted Syrian patrol, which Judas mentally cursed. . .
.
But the delay was short and the impatient Judas was soon outside the
city wall. To his left was a small cemetery, beside it the striped tents of
a band of pilgrims. Crossing the dusty, moonlit road Judas hurried on
towards the stream Kedron and crossed it, the water bubbling softly under
his feet as he leaped from stone to stone. Finally he reached the Gethsemane
bank and saw with joy that the road ahead was deserted. Not far away could
be seen the half-ruined gateway of the olive grove.
After the stifling city Judas was struck by the intoxicating freshness
of the spring night. Across a garden fence the scent of myrtles and acacia
was blown from the fields of Gethsemane.
The gateway was unguarded and a few minutes later Judas was far into
the olive grove and running beneath the mysterious shadows of the great,
branching olive trees. The way led uphill. Judas climbed, panting,
occasionally emerging from darkness into chequered carpets of moonlight
which reminded him of the carpets in the shop kept by Niza's jealous
husband.
Soon an oil-press came in sight in a clearing to Judas' left, with its
heavy stone crushing-wheel and a pile of barrels. There was no one in the
olive grove--work had stopped at sunset and choirs of nightingales were
singing above Judas' head.
He was near his goal. He knew that in a moment from the darkness to his
right he would hear the quiet whisper of running water from the grotto.
There was the sound now and the air was cooler near the grotto. He checked
his pace and called:
'Niza! '
But instead of Niza slipping out from behind a thick olive trunk, the
stocky figure of a man jumped out on to the path. Something glittered
momentarily in his hand. With a faint cry Judas started running back, but a
second man blocked his way.
The first man asked Judas:
'How much did you get? Talk, if you want to save your life.'
Hope welled up in Judas' heart and he cried desperately :

'Thirty tetradrachms! Thirty tetradrachms! I have it all on me.
There's the money! Take it, but don't kill me! '
The man snatched the purse from Judas' hand. At the same moment a knife
was rammed into Judas' back under his shoulder-blade. He pitched forward,
throwing up his hands, fingers clutching. The man in front caught Judas on
his knife and thrust it up to the hilt into Judas' heart.
'Ni . . . 2a . . .' said Judas, in a low, reproachful growl quite
unlike his own, youthful, high-pitched voice and made not another sound. His
body hit the ground so hard that the air whistled as it was knocked out of
his lungs.
Then a third figure stepped out on to the path, wearing a hooded cloak,
'Don't waste any time,' he ordered. The cowled man gave the murderers
a note and they wrapped purse and note into a piece of leather which they
bound criss-cross with twine. The hooded man put the bundle down his
shirt-front, then the two assassins ran off the path and were swallowed by
the darkness between the olive trees.
The third man squatted down beside the body and looked into his face.
It seemed as white as chalk, with an expression not unlike spiritual beauty.
A few seconds later there was not a living soul on the path. The
lifeless body lay with arms outstretched. Its left foot was in a patch of
moonlight that showed up every strap and lace of the man's sandal. The whole
of Gethsemane rang with the song of nightingales.
The man with the hood left the path and plunged deep through the olive
grove, heading southward. He climbed over the wall at the southernmost
corner of the olive grove where the upper course of masonry jutted out. Soon
he reached the bank of Kedron, where he waded in and waited in midstream
until he saw the distant outlines of two horses and a man beside them, also
standing in the stream. Water flowed past, washing their hooves. The groom
mounted one of the horses, the cowled man the other and both set off walking
down the bed of the stream, pebbles crunching beneath the horses' hooves.
The riders left the water, climbed up the bank and followed the line of the
city walls at a walk. Then the groom galloped ahead and disappeared from
sight while the man in the cowl stopped his horse, dismounted on the empty
road, took off his cloak, turned it inside out, and producing a flat-topped,
uncrested helmet from the folds, put it on. The rider was now in military
uniform with a short sword at his hip. He flicked the reins and the fiery
cavalry charger broke into a trot. He had not far to go before he rode up to
the southern gate of Jerusalem.
Torch-flames danced and flickered restlessly under the arch of the gate
where the sentries from the second cohort of the Lightning legion sat on
stone benches playing dice. As the mounted officer approached the soldiers
jumped up, the officer waved to them and rode into the city.
The town was lit up for the festival. Candle flames played at every
window and from each one came the sound of sing-song incantations. Glancing
occasionally into the windows that opened on to the street the rider saw
people at their tables set with kid's meat and cups of wine between the
dishes of bitter herbs. Whistling softly the rider made his way at a
leisurely trot through the deserted streets of the Lower City, heading
towards the fortress of Antonia and looking up now and then at vast
seven-branched candlesticks flaring over the temple or at the moon above
them.
The palace of Herod the Great had no part in the ceremonies of Passover
night. Lights were burning in the outbuildings on the south side where the
officers of the Roman cohort and the Legate of the Legion were quartered,
and there were signs of movement and life. The frontal wings, with their one
involuntary occupant--the Procurator--with their arcades and gilded statues,
seemed blinded by the brilliance of the moonlight. Inside the palace was
darkness and silence.
The Procurator, as he had told Arthanius, preferred not to go inside.
He had ordered a bed to be prepared on the balcony where he had dined and
where he had conducted the interrogation that morning. The Procurator lay
down on the couch, but he could not sleep. The naked moon hung far up in the
clear sky and for several hours the Procurator lay staring at it.
Sleep at last took pity on the hegemon towards midnight. Yawning

spasmodically, the Procurator unfastened his cloak and threw it off, took
off the strap that belted his tunic with its steel sheath-knife, put it on
the chair beside the bed, took off his sandals and stretched out. Banga at
once jumped up beside him on the bed and lay down, head to head. Putting his
arm round the dog's neck the Procurator at last closed his eyes. Only then
did the dog go to sleep.
The couch stood in half darkness, shaded from the moon by a pillar,
though a long ribbon of moonlight stretched from the staircase to the bed.
As the Procurator drifted away from reality he set off along that path of
light, straight up towards the moon. In his sleep he even laughed from
happiness at the unique beauty of that transparent blue pathway. He was
walking with Banga and the vagrant philosopher beside him. They were arguing
about a weighty and complex problem over which neither could gain the upper
hand. They disagreed entirely, which made their argument the more absorbing
and interminable. The execution, of course, had been a pure misunderstanding
: after all this same man, with his ridiculous philosophy that all men were
good, was walking beside him--consequently he was alive. Indeed the very
thought of executing such a man was absurd. There had been no execution I It
had never taken place! This thought comforted him as he strode along the
moonlight pathway.
They had as much time to spare as they wanted, the storm would not
break until evening. Cowardice was undoubtedly one of the most terrible
sins. Thus spake Yeshua Ha-Notsri. No, philosopher, I disagree--it is the
most terrible sin of all!
Had he not shown cowardice, the man who was now Procurator of Judaea
but who had once been a Tribune of the legion on that day in the Valley of
the Virgins when the wild Germans had so nearly clubbed Muribellum the Giant
to death? Have pity on me, philosopher! Do you, a man of your intelligence,
imagine that the Procurator of Judaea would ruin his career for the sake of
a man who had committed a crime against Caesar?
'Yes, yes . . .' Pilate groaned and sobbed in his sleep.
Of course he would risk ruining his career. This morning he had not
been ready to, but now at night, having thoroughly weighed the matter, he
was prepared to ruin himself if need be. He would do anything to save this
crazy, innocent dreamer, this miraculous healer, from execution.
'You and I will always be together,' said the ragged tramp-philosopher
who had so mysteriously become the travelling companion of the Knight of the
Golden Lance. ' Where one of us goes, the other shall go too. Whenever
people think of me they will think of you--me, an orphan child of unknown
parents and you the son of an astrologer-king and a miller's daughter, the
beautiful Pila! '
'Remember to pray for me, the astrologer's son,' begged Pilate in his
dream. And reassured by a nod from the pauper from Ein-Sarid who was his
companion, the cruel Procurator of Judaea wept with joy and laughed in his
sleep.
The hegemon's awakening was all the more fearful after the euphoria of
his dream. Banga started to growl at the moon, and the blue pathway,
slippery as butter, collapsed in front of the Procurator. He opened his eyes
and the first thing he remembered was that the execution had taken place.
Then the Procurator groped mechanically for Banga's collar, then turned his
aching eyes in search of the moon and noticed that it had moved slightly to
one side and was silver in colour. Competing with its light was another more
unpleasant and disturbing light that nickered in front of him. Holding a
naming, crackling torch, Muribellum scowled with fear and dislike at the
dangerous beast, poised to spring.
'Lie down, Banga,' said the Procurator in a suffering voice, coughing.
Shielding his eyes from the torch-flame, he went on:
'Even by moonlight there's no peace for me at night. . . . Oh, ye
gods! You too have a harsh duty. Mark. You have to cripple men. . . .'
Startled, Mark stared at the Procurator, who recollected himself. To
excuse his pointless remark, spoken while still half-dreaming, the
Procurator said :
'Don't be offended, centurion. My duty is even worse, I assure you.
What do you want? '

'The chief of the secret service has come to see you,' said Mark
calmly.
'Send him in, send him in,' said the Procurator, clearing his throat
and fumbling for his sandals with bare feet. The flame danced along the
arcade, the centurion's caligae rang out on the mosaic as he went out into
the garden.
'Even by moonlight there's no peace for me,' said the Procurator to
himself, grinding his teeth.
The centurion was replaced by the man in the cowl.
'Lie down, Banga,' said the Procurator quietly, pressing down on the
dog's head.
Before speaking Arthanius gave his habitual glance round and moved into
a shadow. Having ensured that apart from Banga there were no strangers on
the balcony, he said :
'You may charge me with negligence, Procurator. You were right. I
could not save Judas of Karioth from being murdered. I deserve to be
court-martialled and discharged.'
Arthanius felt that of the two pairs of eyes watching him; one was a
dog's, the other a wolf's. From under his tunic he took out a bloodstained
purse that was sealed with two seals.
'The murderers threw this purseful of money into the house of the High
Priest. There is blood on it--Judas of Kariodh's blood.'
'How much money is there in it? ' asked Pilate, noddling towards the
purse.
'Thirty tetradrachms.'
The Procurator smiled and said :
'Not much.'
Arthanius did not reply.
'Where is the body? '
'I do not know,' replied the cowled man with dignity. ' This morning
we will start the investigation.'
The Procurator shuddered and gave up trying to lace his sandal, which
refused to tie.
'But are you certain he was killed? '
To this the Procurator received the cool reply :
'I have been working in Judaea for fifteen years. Procurator. I began
my service under Valerius Gratus. I don't have to see a body to be able to
say that a man is dead and I am stating that the man called Judas of Karioth
was murdered several hours ago.'
'Forgive me, Arthanius,' replied Pilate. ' I made that remaa-k because
I haven't quite woken up yet. I sleep badly,' the Procurator smiled, ' I was
dreaming of a moonbeam. It was funny, because I seemed to be walking along
it. ... Now, I want your suggestions for dealing with this affair. Where are
you going to look for him? Sit down.'
Arthanius bowed, moved a chair closer to the bed and sat down, his
sword clinking.
'I shall look for him not far from the oil-press in the Geth-semane
olive-grove.'
'I see. Why there? '
'I believe, hegemon, that Judas was killed neither in Jerusalem itself
nor far from the city, but somewhere in its vicinity.'
'You are an expert at your job. I don't know about Rome itself, but in
the colonies there's not a man to touch you. Why do you think that? '
'I cannot believe for one moment,' said Arthanius in a low voice, '
that Judas would have allowed himself to be caught by any ruffians within
the city limits. The street is no place for a clandestine murder. Therefore
he must have been enticed into some cellar or courtyard. But the secret
service has already made a thorough search of the Lower City and if he were
there they would have found him by now. They have not found him and I am
therefore convinced that he is not in the city. If he had been killed a long
way from Jerusalem, then the packet of money could not have been thrown into
the High Priest's palace so soon. He was murdered near the city after they
had lured him out.'
'How did they manage to do that? '

'That, Procurator, is the most difficult problem of all and I am not
even sure that I shall ever be able to solve it.'
'Most puzzling, I agree. A believing Jew leaves the city to go heaven
knows where on the eve of Passover and is killed. Who could have enticed him
and how? Might it have been done by a woman? ' enquired the Procurator,
making a sudden inspired guess.
Arthanius replied gravely :
'Impossible, Procurator. Out of the question. Consider it logically:
who wanted Judas done away with? A band of vagrant cranks, a group of
visionaries which, above all, contains no women. To marry and start a family
needs money, Procurator. But to kill a man with a woman as decoy or
accomplice needs a very great deal of money indeed and these men are
tramps-- homeless and destitute. There was no woman involved in this affair,
Procurator. What is more, to theorise on those lines may even throw us off
the scent and hinder the investigation.' ' I see, Arthanius, that you are
quite right,' said Pilate. ' I was merely putting forward a hypothesis.'
'It is, alas, a faulty one, Procurator.'
'Well then--what is your theory? ' exclaimed the Procurator, staring
at Arthanius with avid curiosity.
'I still think that the bait was money.'
'Remarkable! Who, might I ask, would be likely to entice him out of
the city limits in the middle of the night to offer him money? '
'No one, of course, Procurator. No, I can only make one guess and if
it is wrong, then I confess I am at a loss.' Arthanius leaned closer to
Pilate and whispered : ' Judas intended to hide his money in a safe place
known only to himself.'
'A very shrewd explanation. That must be the answer. I see it now : he
was not lured out of town--he went of his own accord. Yes, yes, that must be
it.'
'Precisely. Judas trusted nobody. He wanted to hide his money.'
'You said Gethsemane . . . Why there? That, I confess, I don't
understand.'
'That, Procurator, is the simplest deduction of all. No one is going
to hide money in the road or out in the open. Therefore Judas did not take
the road to Hebron or to Bethany. He will have gone to somewhere hidden,
somewhere where there are trees. It's obvious--there is no place round about
Jerusalem that answers to that description except Gethsemane. He cannot have
gone far.'
'You have completely convinced me. What is your next move? '
'I shall Immediately start searching for the murderers who followed
Judas out of the city and meanwhile, as I have already proposed to you, I
shall submit myself to be court-martialled.'
'What for? '
'My men lost track of Judas this evening in the bazaar after he had
left Caiaphas' palace. How it occurred, I don't know. It has never happened
to me before. He was put under obser-vation immediately after our talk, but
somewhere an the bazaar area he gave us the slip and disappeared without
trace.'
'I see. You will be glad to hear that I do not consider it necessary
for you to be court-martialled. You did all you could and no one in the
world,'--the Procurator smiled--' could possibly have done more. Reprimand
the men who lost Judas. But let me warn you that I do not wish your
reprimand to be a severe one. After all, we did our best to protect tlhe
scoundrel. Oh yes--I forgot to ask '--the Procurator wiped his forehead-- '
how did they manage to return the money to Caiaphas? '
'That was not particularly difficult. Procurator. The avengers went
behind Caiaphas' palace, where that back street overlooks the rear
courtyard. Then they threw the packet over the fence.'
'With a note? '
'Yes, just as you said they would. Procurator. Oh, by the way . . .'
Arthanius broke the seals on the packet and showed its contents to Pilate.
'Arthanius! Take care what you're doing. Tho se are temple seals.'
'The Procurator need have no fear on that sicore,' replied Arthanius
as he wrapped up the bag of money.

'Do you mean to say that you have copies of all their seals? ' asked
Pilate, laughing.
'Naturally, Procurator,' was Arthanius' curt, unsmiling reply.
'I can just imagine how Caiaphas must have felt! '
'Yes, Procurator, it caused a great stir. They sent for me at
once.
Even in the dark Pilate's eyes could be seen glittering.
'Interesting . . .'
'If you'll forgive my contradicting, Procurator, it was most
uninteresting. A boring and time-wasting case. When I enquired whether
anybody in Caiaphas' palace had paid out this money I was told categorically
that no one had.'
'Really? Well, if they say so, I suppose they didn't. That will make
it all the harder to find the murderers.' ' Quite so, Procurator.'
'Arthanius, it has just occurred to me--might he not have killed
himself?'
'Oh no. Procurator,' replied Arthanius, leaning back in his chair and
staring in astonishment, ' that, if you will forgive me, is most unlikely! '
'Ah, in this city anything is likely. I am prepared to bet that before
long the city will be full of rumours about his suicide.'
Here Arthanius gave Pilate his peculiar stare, thought a moment, and
answered:
'That may be, Procurator.'
Pilate was obviously obsessed with the problem of the murder of Judas
of Karioth, although it had been fully explained,
He said reflectively:
'I should have liked to have seen how they killed him.'
'He was killed with great artistry. Procurator,' replied Arthanius,
giving Pilate an ironic look.
'How do you know? '
'If you will kindly inspect the bag, Procurator,' Arthanius replied, '
I can guarantee from its condition that Judas' blood flowed freely. I have
seen some murdered men in my time.'
'So he will not rise again? '
'No, Procurator. He will rise again,' answered Arthanius, smiling
philosophically, ' when the trumpet-call of their messiah sounds for him.
But not before.'
'All right, Arthanius, that case is dealt with. Now what about the
burial? '
'The executed prisoners have been buried. Procurator.'
'Arthanius, it would be a crime to court-martial you. You deserve the
highest praise. What happened? '
While Arthanius had been engaged on the Judas case, a secret service
squad under the command of Arthanius' deputy had reached the hill shortly
before dark. At the hilltop one body was missing. Pilate shuddered and said
hoarsely :
'Ah, now why didn't I foresee that? '
'There is no cause for worry. Procurator,' said Arthanius and went on
: ' The bodies of Dismas and Hestas, their eyes picked out by carrion crows,
were loaded on to a cart. The men at once set off to look for the third
body. It was soon found. A man called . . .'
'Matthew the Levite,' said Pilate. It was not a question but an
affirmation.
'Yes, Procurator . . . Matthew the Levite was hidden in a cave on the
northern slope of Mount Golgotha, waiting for darkness. With him was
Ha-Notsri's naked body. When the guard entered the cave with a torch, the
Levite fell into a fit. He shouted that he had committed no crime and that
according to the law every man had a right to bury the body of an executed
criminal if he wished to. Matthew the Levite refused to leave the body. He
was excited, almost delirious, begging, threatening, cursing . . .'
'Did they have to arrest him? ' asked Pilate glumly.
'No, Procurator,' replied Arthanius reassuringly. ' They managed to
humour the lunatic by telling him that the body would be buried. The Levite
calmed down but announced that he still refused to leave the body and wanted

to assist in the burial. He said he refused to go even if they threatened to
kill him and even offered them a bread knife to kill him with.'
'Did they send him away? ' enquired Pilate in a stifled voice.
'No, Procurator. My deputy allowed him to take part in the burial.'
'Which of your assistants was in charge of this detail? '
'Tolmai,' replied Arthanius, adding anxiously : ' Did I do wrong? '
'Go on,' replied Pilate. ' You did right. I am beginning to think,
Arthanius, that I am dealing with a man who never makes a mistake--I mean
you.'
'Matthew the Levite was taken away by cart, together with the bodies,
and about two hours later they reached a deserted cave to the north of
Jerusalem. After an hour working in shifts the squad had dug a deep pit in
which they buried the bodies of the three victims.'
'Naked?' ' No, Procurator, the squad had taken chitons with them for
the purpose. Rings were put on the bodies' fingers : Yeshua's ring had one
incised stroke, Dismas' two and Hestas' three. The pit was filled and
covered with stones. Tolmai knows the recognition mark.'
'Ah, if only I could have known! ' said Pilate, frowning. ' I wanted
to see that man Matthew the Levite.' ' He is here, Procurator.'
Pilate stared at Arthanius for a moment with wide-open eyes, then said:
'Thank you for everything you have done on this case. Tomorrow please
send Tolmai to see me and before he comes tell him that I am pleased with
him. And you, Arthanius,'-- the Procurator took out a ring from the pocket
of his belt and handed it to the chief of secret service--' please accept
this as a token of my gratitude.'
With a bow Arthanius said :
'You do me a great honour, Procurator.' ' Please give my commendation
to the squad that carried out the burial and a reprimand to the men who
failed to protect Judas. And send Matthew the Levite to me at once. I need
certain details from him on the case of Yeshua.'
'Very good. Procurator,' replied Arthanius and bowed himself out. The
Procurator clapped his hands and shouted:
'Bring me candles in the arcade! '
Arthanius had not even reached the garden when servants began to appear
bearing lights. Three candlesticks were placed on the table in front of the
Procurator and instantly the moonlit night retreated to the garden as though
Arthanius had taken it with him. In his place a small, thin stranger mounted
to the balcony accompanied by the giant centurion. At a nod from the
Procurator Muribellum turned and marched out.
Pilate studied the new arrival with an eager, slightly fearful look, in
the way people look at someone of whom they have heard a great deal, who has
been in their thoughts and whom they finally meet.
The man who now appeared was about forty, dark, ragged, covered in
dried mud, with a suspicious, wolfish stare. In a word he was extremely
unsightly and looked most of all like one of the city beggars who were to be
found in crowds on the terraces of the temple or in the bazaars of the noisy
and dirty Lower City.
The silence was long and made awkward by the man's strange behaviour.
His face worked, he staggered and he would have fallen if he had not put out
a dirty hand to grasp the edge of the table.
'What's the matter with you? ' Pilate asked him.
'Nothing,' replied Matthew the Levite, making a movement as though he
were swallowing something. His thin, bare, grey neck bulged and subsided
again.
'What is it--answer me,' Pilate repeated.
'I am tired,' answered the Levite and stared dully at the floor.
'Sit down,' said Pilate, pointing to a chair.
Matthew gazed mistrustfully at the Procurator, took a step towards the
chair, gave a frightened look at its gilded armrests and sat down on the
floor beside it.
'Why didn't you sit in the chair? ' asked Pilate.
'I'm dirty, I would make it dirty too,' said the Levite staring at the
floor.
'You will be given something to eat shortly.'

'I don't want to eat.'
'Why tell lies? ' Pilate asked quietly. ' You haven't eaten all day
and probably longer. All right, don't eat. I called you here to show me your
knife.'
'The soldiers took it away from me when they brought me here,' replied
the Levite and added dismally: ' You must give it back to me, because I have
to return it to its owner. I stole it.'
• Why?'
'To cut the ropes.'
'Mark!' shouted the Procurator and the centurion stepped into the
arcade. ' Give me his knife.'
The centurion pulled a dirty breadknife out of one of the two leather
sheaths on his belt, handed it to the Procurator and withdrew.
'Where did you steal the knife? '
'In a baker's shop just inside the Hcbron gate, on the left.'
Pilate inspected the wide blade and tested the edge with his finger.
Then he said :
'Don't worry about the knife, it will be returned to the shop. Now I
want something else--show me the parchment you carry with you on which you
have written what Yeshua has said.'
The Levite looked at Pilate with hatred and smiled a smile of such
ill-will that his face was completely distorted.
'Are you going to take it away from me? The last thing I possess? '
'I didn't say " give it ",' answered Pilate. ' I said " show it to
me".'
The Levite fumbled in his shirt-front and pulled out a roll of
parchment. Pilate took it, unrolled it, spread it out in the light of two
candles and with a frown began to study the barely decipherable script. The
uneven strokes were hard to understand and Pilate frowned and bent over the
parchment, tracing the lines with his finger. He nevertheless managed to
discern that the writings were a disjointed sequence of sayings, dates,
household notes and snatches of poetry. Pilate managed to read:
'there is no death . . . yesterday we ate sweet cakes . . .'
Grimacing with strain, Pilate squinted and read: '... we shall see a
pure river of the water of life . . . mankind will look at the sun through
transparent crystal. . .'
Pilate shuddered. In the last few lines of the parchment he deciphered
the words: '. . . greatest sin ... cowardice . . .'
Pilate rolled up the parchment and with a brusque movement handed it
back to the Levite.
'There, take it,' he said, and after a short silence he added:
'I see you are a man of learning and there is no need for you, living
alone, to walk around in such wretched clothes and without a home. I have a
large library at Caesarea, I am very rich and I would like you to come and
work for me. You would catalogue and look after the papyruses, you would be
fed and clothed.'
The Levite stood up and replied :
'No, I don't want to.'
'Why not? ' asked the Procurator, his expression darkening. ' You
don't like me ...are you afraid of me? '
The same evil smile twisted Matthew's face and he said :
'No, because you would be afraid of me. You would not find it very
easy to look me in the face after having killed him.'
'Silence,' Pilate cut him off. ' Take this money.'
The Levite shook his head and the Procurator went on :
'You, I know, consider yourself a disciple of Yeshua, but I tell you
that you have acquired nothing of what he taught you. For if you had, you
would have certainly accepted something from me. Remember--before he died he
said that he blamed no one--' Pilate raised his finger significantly and his
face twitched --' and I know that he would have accepted something. You are
hard. He was not a hard man. Where will you go? '
Matthew suddenly walked over to Pilate's table, leaned on it with both
hands and staring at the Procurator with burning eyes he whispered to him :
'Know, hegemon, that there is one man in Jerusalem whom I shall kill.

I want to tell you this so that you are warned-- there will be more blood.'
'I know that there will be more blood,' answered Pilate. ' What you
have said does not surprise me. You want to murder me,I suppose?'
'I shall not be able to murder you,' replied the Levite, baring his
teeth in a smile. ' I am not so stupid as to count on that. But I shall kill
Judas of Karioth if it takes the rest of my life.'
At this the Procurator's eyes gleamed with pleasure. Beckoning Matthew
the Levite closer he said :
'You will not succeed, but it will not be necessary. Judas was
murdered tonight.'
The Levite jumped back from the table, stared wildly round and cried:
'Who did it? '
Pilate a.nswered him :
• I did it.
'You must not be jealous,' said Pilate, baring his teeth mirthlessly
and rubbing his hands, ' but I'm afraid he had other admirers Ibeside
yourself.'
'Who did it? ' repeated the Levite in a whisper.
Matthew opened his mouth and stared at the Procurator, who said
quietly:
'It is mot much, but I did it.' And he added : ' Now will you accept
something? '
The Levite thought for a moment, relented and finally said :
'Order them to give me a clean piece of parchment.'
An hour had passed since the Levite had left the palace. The dawn
silence was only disturbed by the quiet tread of the sentries in the garden.
The moon was fading and on the other edge of heaven there appeared the
whitish speck of the morning star. The candles had long been put out. The
Procurator lay on his couch. He was sleeping with his hand under his cheek
and breathing noiselessly. Beside him slept Banga.
Thus Pontius Pilate, fifth Procurator of Judaea, met the dawn of the
fifteenth of Nisan.

27. The Last of Flat No.50

Day was breaking as Margarita read the last words of the chapter '. . .
Thus Pontius Pilate, fifth Procurator of Judaea, met the dawn of the
fifteenth of Nisan.'
From the yard she could hear the lively, cheerful early morning chatter
of sparrows in the branches of the willow and the lime tree.
Margarita got up from her chair, stretched and only then realised how
physically exhausted she felt and how much she wanted to sleep. Mentally,
though, Margarita was in perfect form. Her mind was clear and she was
completely unmoved by the fact that she had spent a night in the
supernatural. It caused her no distress to think that she had been at
Satan's ball, that by some miracle the master had been restored to her, that
the novel had risen from the ashes, that everything was back in its place in
the basement flat after the expulsion of the wretched Aloysius Mogarych. In
a word, her encounter with Woland had done her no psychological harm.
Everything was as it should be.
She went into the next room, made sure that the master was sound
asleep, put out the unnecessary light on the bedside table and stretched out
on the other little divan, covering herself with an old, torn blanket. A
minute later she was in a dreamless sleep. Silence reigned in the basement
rooms and in the whole house, silence filled the little street.
But on that early Saturday morning there was no sleep for a whole floor
of a certain Moscow office which was busy investigating the Woland case ; in
nine offices the lamps had been burning all night. Their windows, looking

out on to a large asphalted square which was being cleaned by slow, whirring
vehicles with revolving brushes, competed with the rising sun in brightness.
Although the outlines of the case had been quite clear since the day
before, when they had closed the Variety as a result of the disappearance of
its management and the scandalous performance of black magic, everything was
complicated by the incessant flow of new evidence.
The department in charge of this strange case now had the task of
drawing together all the strands of the varied and confusing events,
occurring all over Moscow, which included an apparent mixture of sheer
devilry, hypnotic conjuring tricks and barefaced crime.
The first person summoned to the glaring electric light of that
unsleeping floor was Arkady Apollonich Sempleyarov, the chairman of the
Acoustics Commission.
On Friday evening after dinner, the telephone rang in his flat on
Kamenny Most and a man's voice asked to speak to Arkady Apollonich. His
wife, who had answered the call, announced grimly that Arkady Apollonich was
unwell, had gone to lie down and could not come to the telephone.
Nevertheless Arkady Apollonich was obliged to come when the voice said who
was calling.
'Of course ... at once . . . right away,' stammered Arkady's usually
arrogant spouse and she flew like an arrow to rouse Arkady Appollonich from
the couch where he had lain down to recover from the horrific scenes caused
by the theatre incident and the stormy expulsion from their flat of his
young cousin from Saratov. In a quarter of a minute, in underclothes and one
slipper, Arkady Apollonich was babbling into the telephone :
'Yes, it's me. Yes, I will. . .'
His wife, all thought of Arkady Apollonich's infidelity instantly
forgotten, put her terrified face round the door, waving a slipper in the
air and whispering :
'Put your other slipper on ... you'll catch cold . . .' At this Arkady
Apollonich, waving his wife away with a bare leg and rolling his eyes at
her, muttered into the receiver :
'Yes, yes, yes, of course ... I understand . . . I'll come at once . .
.'
Arkady Apollonich spent the rest of the evening with the investigators.
The ensuing conversation was painful and unpleasant in the extreme ; he
was not only made to give a completely frank account of that odious show and
the fight in the box, but was obliged to tell everything about Militsa
Andreyevna Pokobatko from Yelokhovskaya Street, as well as all about his
cousin from Saratov and much more besides, the telling of which caused
Arkady Apollonich inexpressible pain.
Naturally the evidence given by Arkady Apollonich--an intelligent and
cultured man who had been an eyewitness of the show and who as an articulate
and informed observer was not only able to give an excellent description of
the mysterious masked magician and his two rascally assistants but who
actually remembered that the magician's name was Woland--helped considerably
to advance the enquiry. When Arkady Apollonich's evidence was compared with
the evidence of the others, among them several of the ladies who had
suffered such embarrassment after the show (including the woman in violet
knickers who had so shocked Rimsky) and Karpov the usher who had been sent
to Flat No. 50 at 302a, Sadovaya Street--it became immediately obvious where
the culprit was to be found.
They went to No. 50 more than once and not only searched it with
extreme thoroughness but tapped on the walls, examined the chimney-flues and
looked for secret doors. None of this, however, produced any results and
nothing was found during the visits to the flat. Yet someone was living in
the flat, despite the fact that every official body in Moscow concerned with
visiting foreigners stated firmly and categorically that there was not and
could not be a magician called Woland in Moscow. He had definitely not
registered on entry, he had shown no one his passport or any other
documents, contracts or agreements and no one had so much as heard of him.
Kitaitsev, the director of the programmes department of the Theatrical
Commission, swore by all the saints that the missing Stepa Likhodeyev had
never sent him a programme schedule for anyone called Woland for

confirmation and had never telephoned Kitaitsev a word about Woland's
arrival. Therefore he, Kitaitsev, failed completely to understand how Stepa
could have allowed a show of this sort to be put on at the Variety. When he
was told that Arkady Apollonich had seen the performance with his own eyes,
Kitaitsev could only spread his hands and raise his eyes to heaven. From
those eyes alone it was obvious that Kitaitsev was as pure as crystal.
Prokhor Petrovich, the chairman of the Entertainments Commission . . .
He, incidentally, had re-entered his suit as soon as the police reached
his office, to the ecstatic joy of Anna Richardovna and to the great
annoyance of the police, who had been alerted for nothing. As soon as he was
back at his post and wearing his striped grey suit, Prokhor Petrovich fully
approved all the minutes that his suit had drafted during his short absence.
So Prokhor Petrovich obviously knew nothing about Woland either.
The sum total of their enquiries amounted to a conclusion which was
little short of farcical: thousands of spectators, plus the Variety Theatre
staff plus, finally, Arkady Apollonich, that highly intelligent man, had
seen this magician and his thrice-cursed assistants, yet in the meantime all
four had completely vanished. What could it mean? Had Woland been swallowed
up by the earth or had he, as some claimed, never come to Moscow at all? If
one accepted the first alternative, then he had apparently spirited away the
entire Variety management with him; if you believed the second alternative,
it meant that the theatre management itself, having first indulged in a
minor orgy of destruction had decamped from Moscow leaving no trace.
The officer in charge of the case was, to give him his due, a man who
knew his job. Rimsky, for instance, was tracked down with astounding speed.
Merely by linking the Ace of Diamonds' behaviour at the taxi-rank near the
cinema with certain timings, such as the time of the end of the show and the
time at which Rimsky could have vanished, they were able to send an
immediate telegram to Leningrad. An hour later (on Friday evening) the reply
came back that Rimsky had been found in room 412 at the Astoria Hotel, on
the fourth floor next to the room containing the repertory manager of one of
the Moscow theatres then on tour in Leningrad, in that famous room with the
blue-grey furniture and the luxurious bathroom.
Rimsky, found hiding in the wardrobe of his room at the Astoria, was
immediately arrested and interrogated in Leningrad, after which a telegram
reached Moscow stating that treasurer Rimsky was an irresponsible witness
who had proved unwilling or incapable of replying coherently to questions
and had done nothing but beg to be put into an armourplated strong-room
under armed guard. An order was telegraphed to Leningrad for Rimsky to be
escorted back to Moscow, and he returned under guard by the Friday evening
train.
By Friday evening, too, they were on the track of Likhodeyev. Telegrams
asking for information on Likhodeyev had been sent to every town and a reply
came from Yalta that Likhodeyev was there but about to leave for Moscow by
aeroplane.
The only person whose trail they failed to pick up was Varenukha. This
man, known to the entire theatrical world of Moscow, seemed to have vanished
without trace.
Meanwhile investigations were in hand on related incidents in other
parts of Moscow. An explanation was needed, for instance, of the baffling
case of the office staff who had sung the ' Volga Boatmen ' song
(Stravinsky, incidentally, cured them all within two hours by subcutaneous
injections) and of other cases of people (and their victims) who had
proffered various pieces of rubbish under the illusion that they were
banknotes. The nastiest, the most scandalous and the most insoluble of all
these episodes was, of course, the theft, in broad daylight, of Berlioz's
head from the open coffin at Griboyedov.
The job of the team of twelve men assigned to the case was rather like
that of someone with a knitting-needle trying to pick up stitches dropped
all over Moscow.
One of the detectives called on Profes sor Stravinsky's clinic and
began by asking for a list of all patients admitted during the past three
days. By this means they discovered Nikanor Ivano-vich Bosoi and the
unfortunate compere whose head had been wrenched off, although they were not

greatly interested in these two. It was obvious now that they had both
merely been victimised by the gang headed by this weird magician. In Ivan
Nikolayich Bezdomny, however, the detective showed the very greatest
interest.
Early on Friday evening the door of Ivan's room opened to admit a
polite, fresh-faced young man- He looked quite unlike a detective, yet he
was one of the best in the Moscow force. He saw lying in bed a pale,
pinched-looking young man with lack-lustre, wandering eyes. The detective, a
man of considerable charm and tact, said that he had come to see Ivan for a
talk about the incident at Patriarch's Ponds two days previously.
The poet would have been triumphant if the detective had called
earlier, on Thursday for instance when Ivan had been trying so loudly and
passionately to induce someone to listen to his story about Patriarch's
Ponds. Now people were at last coming to hear his version of the
affair--just when his urge to help capture Professor Woland had completely
evaporated.
For Ivan, alas, had altogether changed since the night of Berlioz's
death. He was quite prepared to answer the detective's questions politely,
but his voice and his expression betrayed his utter disinterest. The poet no
longer cared about Berlioz's fate.
While Ivan had been dozing before the detective's arrival, a succession
of images had passed before his mind's eye. He saw a strange, unreal,
vanished city with great arcaded marble piles ;
with roofs that flashed in the sunlight; with the grim, black and
pitiless tower of Antonia ; with a palace on the western hill plunged almost
to roof-level in a garden of tropical greenery, and above the garden bronze
statues that glowed in the setting sun ; with Roman legionaries clad in
armour marching beneath the city walls.
In his half-waking dream Ivan saw a man sitting motionless in a chair,
a clean-shaven man with taut, yellowing skin who wore a white cloak lined
with red, who sat and stared with loathing at this alien, luxuriant garden.
Ivan saw, too, a treeless ochre-coloured hill with three empty cross-barred
gibbets.
The events at Patriarch's Ponds no longer interested Ivan Bezdomny the
poet.
'Tell me, Ivan Nikolayich, how far were you from the turnstile when
Berlioz fell under the tram? '
A barely detectable smile of irony crossed Ivan's Ups as he replied:
'I was far away.'
'And was the man in checks standing beside the turnstile? '
'No, he was on a bench nearby.'
'You distinctly remember, do you, that he did not approach the
turnstile at the moment when Berlioz fell? '
'I do remember. He didn't move. He was on the bench and he stayed
there.'
These were the detective's last questions. He got up, shook hands with
Ivan, wished him a speedy recovery and said that he soon hoped to read some
new poetry of his.
'No,' said Ivan quietly. ' I shall not write any more poetry.'
The detective smiled politely and assured the poet that although he
might be in a slight state of depression at the moment, it would soon pass.
'No,' said Ivan, staring not at the detective but at the distant
twilit horizon, ' it will never pass. The poetry I wrote was bad p.oetry. I
see that now.'
The detective left Ivan, having gathered some extremely important
evidence. Following the thread of events backwards from end to beginning,
they could now pinpoint the source of the whole episode. The detective had
no doubt that the events in question had all begun with the murder at
Patriarch's Ponds. Neither Ivan, of course, nor the man in the check suit
had pushed the unfortunate chairman of massolit under the tramcar;
n"o one had physically caused him to fall under the wheels, but the
detective was convinced that Berlioz had thrown himself (or had fallen)
beneath the tram while under hypnosis.
Although there was plenty of evidence and it was obvious whom they

should arrest and where, it proved impossible to lay hands on them. There
was no doubt that someone was in flat Nib. 50. Occasionally the telephone
was answered by a quavering or a nasal voice, occasionally someone in the
flat opened a window and the sound of a gramophone could be heard floating
out. Yet whenever they went there the place was completely empty. They
searched it at various hours of the day, each time going over it with a
fine-tooth comb. The flat had been under suspicion for some time and a watch
had been placed on both the main stairs and the back stairs ; men were even
posted on the roof among the chimney pots. The flat was playing tricks and
there was nothing that anyone could do about it.
The case dragged on in this way until midnight on Friday, wlien Baron
Maigel, wearing evening dress and patent-leather pumps, entered flat No. 50
as a guest. He was heard being let in. Exactly ten minutes later the
authorities entered the flat without a sound. It was not only empty of
tenants, but worse, there was not even a trace of Baron Maigel.
There things rested until dawn on Saturday, when some new anid valuable
information came to light as a six-seater passenger aeroplane landed at
Moscow airport having flown from the Crimea. Among its passengers was one
extremely odd young man. He had heavy stubble on his face, had not washed
for three days, his eyes were red with exhaustion and fright, he had no
luggage and was somewhat eccentrically dressed. He wore a sheepskin hat, a
felt cloak over a nightshirt and brand-new blue leather bedroom slippers. As
he stepped off the gangway from the aircraft cabin, a group of expectant men
approached him. A short while later the one and only manager of the Variety
Theatre, Stepan Bogdanovich Likhodeyev, was facing the detectives. He added
some new information. They were now able to establish that Woland had
tricked his way into the Variety after hypnotising Stepa Likhodeyev and had
then spirited Stepa God knows how many kilometres away from Moscow. This
gave the authorities more evidence, but far from making their job any easier
it made it if anything rather harder, because it was obviously not going to
be so simple to arrest a person capable of the kind of sleight-of-hand to
which Stepan Bogdanovich had fallen victim. Likhodeyev, at his own request,
was locked up in a strong-room.
The next witness was Varenukha, arrested at home where he had returned
after an unexplained absence lasting nearly forty-eight hours. In spite of
his promise to Azazello, the house manager began by lying. He should not,
however, be judged too harshly for this--Azazello had, after all, only
forbidden him to lie on the telephone and in this instance Varenukha was
talking without the help of a telephone. With a shifty look Ivan Savye-lich
announced that on Thursday he had shut himself up in his office and had got
drunk, after which he had gone somewhere-- he couldn't remember where; then
somewhere else and drunk some loo-proof vodka ; had collapsed under a
hedge--again he couldn't remember where. He was then told that his stupid
and irrational behaviour was prejudicial to the course of justice and that
he would be held responsible for it. At this Varenukha broke down, sobbing,
and whispered in a trembling voice, glancing round fearfully, that he was
only telling lies out of fear of Woland's gang, who had already roughed him
up once and that he begged, prayed, longed to be locked up in an armoured
cell.
'There soon won't be room for them all in that strong-room! ' growled
one of the investigators.
'These villains have certainly put the fear of God into them,' said
the detective who had questioned Ivan.
They calmed Varenukha as well as they could, assuring him that he would
be given protection without having to resort to a strong-room. He then
admitted that he had never drunk any loo-proof vodka but had been beaten up
by two characters, one with a wall eye and the other a stout man . . .
'Looking like a cat? '
'Yes, yes,' whispered Varenukha, almost swooning with fear and
glancing round every moment, adding further details of how he had spent
nearly two days in flat No. 50 as a vampire's decoy and had nearly caused
Rimsky's death . . .
Just then Rimsky himself was brought in from the Leningrad train, but
this grey-haired, terror-stricken, psychologically disturbed old man,

scarcely recognisable as the treasurer of the Variety Theatre, stubbornly
refused to speak the truth. Rimsky claimed that he had never seen Hella at
his office window that night, nor had he seen Varenukha; he had simply felt
ill and had taken the train to Leningrad in a fit of amnesia. Needless to
say the ailing treasurer concluded his evidence by begging to be locked up
in a strong-room.
Anna was arrested while trying to pay a store cashier with a ten-dollar
bill. Her story about people flying out of the landing window and the
horseshoe, which she claimed to have picked up in order to hand it over to
the police, was listened to attentively.
'Was the horseshoe really gold and studded with diamonds? ' they asked
Anna.
'Think I don't know diamonds when I see them? ' replied Anna.
'And did he really give you ten-rouble notes? '
'Think I don't know a tenner when I see one? '
'When did they turn into dollars? '
'I don't know what dollars are and I never saw any! ' whined Anna. ' I
know my rights! I was given the money as a reward and went to buy some
material with it.' Then she started raving about the whole thing being the
fault of the house management committee which had allowed evil forces to
move in on the fifth floor and made life impossible for everybody else.
Mere a detective waved a pen at Anna to shut up because she was boring
them, and signed her release on a green form with which, to the general
satisfaction, she left the building.
There followed a succession of others, among them Nikolai Ivanovich,
who had been arrested thanks to the stupidity of his jealous wife in telling
the police that her husband was missing. The detectives were not
particularly surprised when Nikolai Ivanovich produced the joke certificate
testifying that he had spent his time at Satan's ball. Nikolai Ivanovich
departed slightly from the truth, however, when he described how he had
carried Margarita Nikolayevna's naked maid through the air to bathe in the
river at some unknown spot and how Margarita Nikolay-evna herself had
appeared naked at the window. He thought it unnecessary to recall, for
instance, that he had appeared in the bedroom carrying Margarita's abandoned
slip or that he had called Natasha ' Venus.' According to him, Natasha had
flown out of the window, mounted him and made him fly away from Moscow . . .
'I was forced to obey under duress,' said Nikolai Ivanovich, finishing
his tale with a request not to tell a word of it to his wife, which was
granted.
Nikolai Ivanovich's evidence established the fact that both Margarita
Nikolayevna and her maid Natasha had vanished without trace. Steps were
taken to find them.
So the investigation progressed without a moment's break until Saturday
morning. Meanwhile the city was seething with the most incredible rumours,
in which a tiny grain of truth was embellished with a luxuriant growth of
fantasy. People were saying that after the show at the Variety all two
thousand spectators had rushed out into the street as naked as the day they
were born ; that the police had uncovered a magic printing-press for
counterfeiting money on Sadovaya Street; that a gang had kidnapped the five
leading impresarios in Moscow but that the police had found them all again,
and much more that was unrepeatable.
As it grew near lunchtime a telephone bell rang in the investigators'
office. It was a report from Sadovaya Street that the haunted flat was
showing signs of life again. Someone inside had apparently opened the
windows, sounds of piano music and singing had been heard coming from it,
and a black cat had been observed sunning itself on a windowsill.
At about four o'clock on that warm afternoon a large squad of men in
plain clothes climbed out of three cars that had stopped a little way short
of No. 302a, Sadovaya Street. Here the large squad divided into two smaller
ones, one of which entered the courtyard through the main gateway and headed
straight for staircase 6, while the other opened a small door, normally
locked, leading to the back staircase and both began converging on flat No.
50 by different stairways.
While this was going on Koroviev and Azazello, in their normal clothes

instead of festive tailcoats, were sitting in the dining-room finishing
their lunch. Woland, as was his habit, was in the bedroom and no one knew
where the cat was, but to judge from the clatter of saucepans coming from
the kitchen Behemoth was presumably there, playing the fool as usual.
'What are those footsteps on the staircase? ' asked Koroviev, twirling
his spoon in a cup of black coffee.
'They're coming to arrest us,' replied Azazello and drained a glass of
brandy.
'Well, well . . .' was Koroviev's answer.
The men coming up the front staircase had by then reached the
third-floor landing, where a couple of plumbers were fiddling with the
radiator. The party exchanged meaning looks with the plumbers.
'They're all at home,' whispered one of the plumbers, tapping the pipe
with his hammer.
At this the leader of the squad drew a black Mauser from under his
overcoat and the man beside him produced, a skeleton key. All the men were
suitably armed. Two of them had thin, easily unfurled silk nets in their
pockets, another had. a lasso and the sixth man was equipped with gauze
masks and an ampoule of chloroform.
In a second the front door of No. 50 swung open and the party was in
the hall, whilst the knocking on the door from the kitchen to the back
staircase showed that the second squad had also arrived on time.
This time at least partial success seemed to be in their grasp. Men at
once fanned out to all the rooms and found no one, but on the dining-room
table were the remains of an obviously recently finished meal and in the
drawing-room, alongside a crystal jug, a huge black cat was perched on the
mantelpiece, holding a Primus in its front paws.
There was a long pause as the men gazed at the cat.
'H'm, yes ... that's him . . .' whispered one 'of them.
'I'm doing no harm--I'm not playing games, I'm mending the Primus,'
said the cat with a hostile scowl, ' and I'd better warn you that a cat is
an ancient and inviolable animal.'
'Brilliant performance,' whispered a man and another said loudly and
firmly:
'All right, you inviolable ventriloquist's dummy, come here! '
The net whistled across the room but the man missed his target and only
caught the crystal jug, which broke with a loud crash.
'Missed!' howled the cat. ' Hurrah! ' Putting aside the Primus the cat
whipped a Browning automatic from behind its back. In a flash it took aim at
the nearest man, but the detective beat the cat to the draw and fired first.
The cat flopped head first from the mantelpiece, dropping the Browning and
upsetting the Primus.
'It's all over,' said the cat in a weak voice, stretched out in a pool
of blood. ' Leave me for a moment, let me say goodbye. Oh my friend
Azazello,' groaned the cat, streaming blood, ' where are you? ' The animal
turned its expiring gaze towards the door into the dining-room. ' You didn't
come to my help when I was outnumbered . . . you left poor Behemoth,
betraying him for a glass of brandy--though it was very good brandy! Well,
my death will be on your conscience but I'll bequeath you my Browning . . .'
'The net, the net,' whispered the men urgently round the cat. But the
net somehow got tangled up in the man's pocket and would not come out.
'The only thing that can save a mortally wounded cat,' said Behemoth,
' is a drink of paraffin.' Taking advantage of the confusion it put its
mouth to the round filler-hole of the Primus and drank some paraffin. At
once the blood stopped pouring from above its left forepaw. The cat jumped
up bold and full of life, tucked the Primus under its foreleg, leaped back
with it on to the mantelpiece and from there, tearing the wallpaper, crawled
along the wall and in two seconds it was high above the invaders, sitting on
a metal pelmet.
In a moment hands were grabbing the curtains and pulling them down
together with the pelmet, bringing the sunlight flooding into the darkened
room. But neither the cat nor the Primus fell. Without dropping the Primus
the cat managed to leap through the air and jump on to the chandelier
hanging in the middle of the room.

'Step-ladder! ' came the cry from below. ' I challenge you to a duel!
' screamed the cat, sailing over their heads on the swinging chandelier. The
Browning appeared in its paw again and it lodged the Primus between the arms
of the chandelier. The cat took aim and, as it swung like a pendulum over
the detectives' heads, opened fire on them. The sound of gunfire rocked the
flat. Fragments of crystal strewed the floor, the mirror over the fireplace
was starred with bullet holes, plaster dust flew everywhere, ejected
cartridge cases pattered to the floor, window panes shattered and paraffin
began to spurt from the punctured tank of the Primus. There was now no
question of taking the cat alive and the men were aiming hard at its head,
stomach, breast and back. The sound of gunfire started panic in the
courtyard below.
But this fusillade did not last long and soon died down. It had not, in
fact, caused either the men or the cat any harm. There were no dead and no
wounded. No one, including the cat, had been hit. As a final test one man
fired five rounds into the beastly animal's stomach and the cat retaliated
with a whole volley that had the same result--not a scratch. As it swung on
the chandelier, whose motion was gradually shortening all the time, it blew
into the muzzle of the Browning and spat on its paw.
The faces of the silent men below showed total bewilderment. This was
the only case, or one of the only cases, in which gunfire had proved to be
completely ineffectual. Of course the cat's Browning might have been a toy,
but this was certainly not true of the detectives' Mausers. The cat's first
wound, which had undoubtedly occurred, had been nothing but a trick and a
villainous piece of deception, as was its paraffin-drinking act.
One more attempt was made to seize the cat. The lasso was thrown, it
looped itself round one of the candles and the whole chandelier crashed to
the floor. Its fall shook the whole building, but it did not help matters.
The men were showered with splinters while the cat flew through the air and
landed high up under the ceiling on the gilded frame of the mirror over the
mantelpiece. It made no attempt to bolt but from its relatively safe perch
announced:
'I completely fail to understand the reason for this rough treatment .
. .'
Here the cat's speech was interrupted by a low rumbling voice that
seemed to come from nowhere :
'What's happening in this flat? It's disturbing my work . . .'
Another voice, ugly and nasal, cried :
'It's Behemoth, of course, damn him!'
A third, quavering voice said :
'Messire! Saturday. The sun is setting. We must go.'
'Excuse me, I've no more time to spare talking,' said the cat from the
mirror. ' We must go.' It threw away its Browning, smashing two window
panes, then poured the paraffin on to the floor where it burst spontaneously
into a great flame as high as the ceiling.
It burned fast and hard, with even more violence than is usual with
paraffin. At once the wallpaper started to smoke, the torn curtain caught
alight and the frames of the broken windowpanes began to smoulder. The cat
crouched, gave a miaow, jumped from the mirror to the windowsill and
disappeared, clutching the Primus. Shots were heard from outside. A man
sitting on an iron fire-escape on the level of No. 50's windows fired at the
cat as it sprang from windowsill to windowsill heading for the drainpipe on
the corner of the building. The cat scrambled up the drainpipe to the roof.
There it came under equally ineffective fire from the men covering the
chimney-pots and the cat faded into the westering sunlight that flooded the
city.
Inside the flat the parquet was already crackling under the men's feet
and in the fireplace, where the cat had shammed dead, there gradually
materialised the corpse of Baron Maigel, his little beard jutting upwards,
his eyes glassy. The body was impossible to move.
Hopping across the burning blocks of parquet, beating out their
smouldering clothes, the men in the drawing-room retreated to the study and
the hall. The men who had been in the dining-room and the bedroom ran out
into the passage. The drawing-room was already full of smoke and fire.

Someone managed to dial the fire brigade and barked into the receiver :
'Sadovaya, 302a! '
They could stay no longer. Flame was lashing into the hallway and it
was becoming difficult to breathe.
As soon as the first wisps of smoke appeared through the shattered
windows of the haunted flat, desperate cries were heard from the courtyard :
'Fire! Fire! Help! We're on fire!'
In several flats people were shouting into the telephone :
'Sadovaya! Sadovaya, 302a! '
Just as the heart-stopping sound of bells was heard from the long red
fire-engines racing towards Sadovaya Street from all over the city, the
crowd in the courtyard saw three dark figures, apparently men, and one naked
woman, float out of the smoking windows on the fifth floor.

28. The Final Adventure of Koroviev and Behemoth

No one, of course, can say for certain whether those figures were real
or merely imagined by the frightened inhabitants of that ill-fated block on
Sadovaya Street. If they were real, no one knows exactly where they were
going; but we do know that about a quarter of an hour after the outbreak of
fire on Sadovaya Street, a tall man in a check suit and a large black cat
appeared outside the glass doors of the Torgsin Store in Smolensk Market.
Slipping dexterously between the passers-by, the man opened the outer
door of the store only to be met by a small, bony and extremely hostile
porter who barred his way and said disagreeably :
'No cats allowed!'
'I beg your pardon,' quavered the tall man, cupping his knotty hand to
his ear as though hard of hearing,' no cats, did you say? What cats?'
The porter's eyes bulged, and with reason: there was no cat by the
man's side, but instead a large fat man in a tattered cap, with vaguely
feline looks and holding a Primus, was pushing his way into the shop.
For some reason the misanthropic porter did not care for the look of
this couple.
'You can only buy with foreign currency here,' he croaked, glaring at
them from beneath ragged, moth-eaten eyebrows.
'My dear fellow,' warbled the tall man, one eye glinting through his
broken pince-nez,' how do you know that I haven't got any? Are you judging
by my suit? Never do that, my good man. You may make a terrible mistake.
Read the story of the famous caliph Haroun-al-Rashid and you'll see what I
mean. But for the present, leaving history aside for a moment, I warn you I
shall complain to the manager and I shall tell him such tales about you that
you'll wish you had never opened your mouth!'
'This Primus of mine may be full of foreign currency for all you
know,' said the stout cat-like figure. An angry crowd was forming behind
them. With a look of hatred and suspicion at the dubious pair, the porter
stepped aside and our friends Koroviev and Behemoth found themselves in the
store. First they looked around and then Koroviev announced in a penetrating
voice, audible everywhere :
'What a splendid store! A very, very good. store indeed! '
The customers turned round from the counters to stare at Koroviev in
amazement, although there was every reason to praise the store. Hundreds of
different bolts of richly coloured poplins stood in holders on the floor,
whilst behind them the shelves were piled with calico, chiffon amd worsted.
Racks full of shoes stretched into the distance where several women were
sitting on low chairs, a worn old shoe on their right foot, a gleaming new

one on their left. From somewhere out of sight came the sound of song and
gramophone music.
Spurning all these delights Koroviev and Behemoth went straight to the
delicatessen and confectionery departments. These were spaciously laid out
and full of women in headscarves and berets. A short, completely square,
blue-jowled little man wearing horn-rims, a pristine hat with unstained
ribbon, dressed in a fawn overcoat and tan kid gloves, was standing at a
counter and booming away in an authoritative voice at: an assistant in a
clean white overall and blue cap. With a long sharp knife, very like the
knife Matthew the Levite stole, he was easing the snake-like skin away from
the fat, juicy flesh of a pink salmon.
'This department is excellent, too,' Koroviev solemnly pronounced '
and that foreigner looks a nice man.' He pointed approvingly at the fawn
coat.
'No, Faggot, no' answered Behemoth thoughtfully. ' You're
wrong. I think there is something missing in that gentleman's face.'
The fawn back quivered, but it was probably coincidence, because he was
after all a foreigner and could not have understood what Koroviev and his
companion had been saying in Russian.
'Is goot? ' enquired the fawn customer in a stern voice.
'First class! ' replied the assistant, showing off his blade-work with
a flourish that lifted a whole side of skin from the salmon.
'Is goot--I like, is bad--I not like,' added the foreigner.
'But of course! ' rejoined the salesman.
At this point our friends left the foreigner to his salmon and moved
over to the cakes and pastries.
'Hot today,' said Koroviev to a pretty, red-cheeked young salesgirl,
to which he got no reply.
'How much are the tangerines? ' Koroviev then asked her.
'Thirty kopeks the kilo,' replied the salesgirl.
'They look delicious,' said Koroviev with a sigh, ' Oh, dear ' . . .
He thought for a while longer, then turned to his friend. ' Try one.
Behemoth.'
The stout cat-person tucked his Primus under his arm, took the
uppermost tangerine off the pyramid, ate it whole, skin and all, and took
another.
The salesgirl was appalled.
'Hey--are you crazy? ' she screamed, the colour vanishing from her
cheeks. ' Where are your travellers' cheques or foreign currency? ' She
threw down her pastry-tongs.
'My dear, sweet girl,' cooed Koroviev, leaning right across the
counter and winking at the assistant,' I can't help it but we're just out of
currency today. I promise you I'll pay you it all cash down next time,
definitely not later than Monday! We live nearby on Sadovaya, where the
house caught fire . . .'
Having demolished a third tangerine. Behemoth thrust his paw into an
ingenious structure built of chocolate bars, pulled out the bottom one,
which brought the whole thing down with a crash, and swallowed the chocolate
complete with its gold wrapper.
The assistant at the fish counter stood petrified, knife in hand, the
fawn-coated foreigner turned round towards the looters, revealing that
Behemoth was wrong: far from his face lacking something it was if anything
over-endowed--huge pendulous cheeks and bright, shifty eyes.
The salesgirl, now pale yellow, wailed miserably.
'Palosich! Palosich!'
The sound brought customers running from the drapery department.
Meanwhile Behemoth had wandered away from the temptations of the
confectionery counter and thrust his paw into a barrel labelled ' Selected
Kerch Salted Herrings,' pulled out a couple of herrings, gulped them both
down and spat out the tails.
'Palosich! ' came another despairing shriek from the confectionery
counter and the man at the fish counter, his goatee wagging in fury, barked
:
'Hey, you--what d'you think you're doing!'

Pavel Yosifovich (reduced to ' Palosich' in the excitement) was already
hurrying to the scene of action. He was an imposing man in a clean white
overall like a surgeon, with a pencil sticking out of his breast pocket. He
was clearly a man of great experience. Catching sight of a herring's tail
protruding from Behemoth's mouth he summed up the situation in a moment and
refusing to join in a shouting match with the two villains, waved his arm
and gave the order :
‘ Whistle! '
The porter shot out into Smolensk Market and relieved his feelings with
a furious whistle-blast. As customers began edging up to the rogues and
surrounding them, Koroviev went into action.
'Citizens! ' he cried in a vibrant ringing voice,' What's going on
here? Eh? I appeal to you! This poor man '--Koroviev put a tremor into his
voice and pointed at Behemoth, who had immediately assumed a pathetic
expression--' this poor man has been mending a Primus all day. He's hungry .
. . where could he get any foreign currency? '
Pavel Yosifovich, usually calm and reserved, shouted grimly:
'Shut up, you! ' and gave another impatient wave of his arm. Just then
the automatic bell on the door gave a cheerful tinkle. Koroviev, quite
undisturbed by the manager's remark, went on:
'I ask you--where? He's racked with hunger and thirst, he's hot. So
the poor fellow tried a tangerine. It's only worth three kopecks at the
most, but they have to start whistling like nightingales in springtime,
bothering the police and stopping them from doing their proper job. But it's
all right for him isn't it?! '
Koroviev pointed at the fat man in the fawn coat, who exhibited violent
alarm. ' Who is he? Mm? Where's he from? Why is he here? Were we dying of
boredom without him? Did we invite him? Of course not! ' roared the
ex-choirmaster, his mouth twisted into a sarcastic leer. ' Look at him--in
his smart fawn coat, bloated with good Russian salmon, pockets bulging with
currency, and what about our poor comrade here? What about him, I ask you? '
wailed Koroviev, completely overcome by his own oratory.
This ridiculous, tactless and doubtless politically dangerous speech
made Pavel Yosifovich shake with rage, but strangely enough it was clear
from the looks of the customers that many of them approved of it. And when
Behemoth, wiping his eyes with a ragged cuff, cried tragically: ' Thank you,
friend, for speaking up for a poor man,' a miracle happened. A quiet,
dignified, little old man, shabbily but neatly dressed, who had been buying
three macaroons at the pastry counter, was suddenly transformed. His eyes
flashed fire, he turned purple, threw his bagfull of macaroons on to the
floor and shouted in a thin, childish voice : ' He's right! ' Then he picked
up a tray, threw away the remains of the chocolate-bar Eiffel Tower that
Behemoth had ruined, waved it about, pulled off the foreigner's hat with his
left hand, swung the tray with his right and brought it down with a crash on
the fawn man's balding head. There was a noise of the kind you hear when
sheet steel is thrown down from a lorry. Turning pale, the fat man staggered
and fell backwards into the barrel of salted herrings, sending up a fountain
of brine and fish-scales. This produced a second miracle. As the fawn man
fell into the barrel of fish he screamed in perfect Russian without a trace
of an accent:
'Help! Murder! They're trying to kill me! ' The shock had obviously
given him sudden command of a hitherto unknown language.
The porter had by now stopped whistling and through the crowd of
excited customers could be seen the approach of two police helmets. But the
cunning Behemoth poured paraffin from the Primus on to the counter and it
burst spontaneously into flame. It flared up and ran along the counter,
devouring the beautiful paper ribbons decorating the baskets of fruit. The
salesgirls leaped over the counter and ran away screaming as the flames
caught the blinds on the windows and more paraffin caught alight on the
floor.
With a shriek of horror the customers shuffled out of the
confectionery, sweeping aside the helpless Pavel Yosifovich, while the fish
salesmen galloped away towards the staff door, clutching their razor-sharp
knives.

Heaving himself out of the barrel the fawn man, covered in salt-herring
juice, staggered past the salmon counter and followed the crowd. There was a
tinkling and crashing of glass at the doorway as the public fought to get
out, whilst the two villains, Koroviev and the gluttonous Behemoth,
disappeared, no one knew where. Later, witnesses described having seen them
float up to the ceiling and then burst like a couple of balloons. This story
sounds too dubious for belief and we shall probably never know what really
happened.
We do know however that exactly a minute later Behemoth and Koroviev
were seen on the boulevard pavement just outside Griboyedov House. Koroviev
stopped by the railings and said:
'Look, there's the writers' club. You know. Behemoth, that house has a
great reputation. Look at it, my friend. How lovely to think of so much
talent ripening under that roof.'
'Like pineapples in a hothouse,' said Behemoth, climbing up on to the
concrete plinth of the railings for a better look at the yellow, colonnaded
house.
'Quite so,' agreed his inseparable companion Koroviev, ' and what a
delicious thrill one gets, doesn't one, to think that at this moment in that
house there may be the future author of a Don Quixote, or a Faust or who
knows--Dead Souls? '
'It could easily happen,' said Behemoth.
'Yes,' Koroviev went on, wagging a warning finger, ' but-- but, I say,
and I repeat--but! . . provided that those hothouse growths are not attacked
by some microorganism, provided they're not nipped in the bud, provided they
don't rot! And it can happen with pineapples, you know! Ah, yes, it can
happen!'
'Frightening thought,' said Behemoth.
'Yes,' Koroviev went on, ' think what astonishing growths may sprout
from the seedbeds of that house and its thousands of devotees of Melpomene,
Polyhymnia and Thalia. Just imagine the furore if one of them were to
present the reading public with a Government Inspector or at least a Eugene
Onegm!'
'By the way,' enquired the cat poking its round head through a gap in
the railings. ' what are they doing on the verandah? '
'Eating,' explained Koroviev. ' I should add that this place has a
very decent, cheap restaurant. And now that I think of it, like any tourist
starting on a long journey I wouldn't mind a snack and large mug of iced
beer.'
'Nor would I,' said Behemoth and the two rogues set off under the lime
trees and up the asphalt path towards the unsuspecting restaurant.
A pale, bored woman in white ankle-socks and a white tasselled beret
was sitting on a bentwood chair at the corner entrance to the verandah,
where there was an opening in the creeper-grown trellis. In front of her on
a plain kitchen table lay a large book like a ledger, in which for no known
reason the woman wrote the names of the people entering the restaurant. She
stopped Koroviev and Behemoth.
'Your membership cards?' she said, staring in surprise at Koroviev's
pince-nez, at Behemoth's Primus and grazed elbow.
'A thousand apologies, madam, but what membership cards? ' asked
Koroviev in astonishment.
'Are you writers? ' asked the woman in return.
'Indubitably,' replied Koroviev with dignity.
'Where are your membership cards? ' the woman repeated.
'Dear lady . . .' Koroviev began tenderly.
'I'm not a dear lady,' interrupted the woman.
'Oh, what a shame,' said Koroviev in a disappointed voice and went on
: ' Well, if you don't want to be a dear lady, which would have been
delightful, you have every right not to be. But look here--if you wanted to
make sure that Dostoyevsky was a writer, would you really ask him for his
membership card? Why, you only have to take any five pages of one of his
novels and you won't need a membership card to convince you that the man's a
writer. I don't suppose he ever had a membership card, anyway I What do you
think?' said Koroviev, turning to Behemoth.

'I'll bet he never had one,' replied the cat, putting the Primus on
the table and wiping the sweat from its brow with its paw.
‘ You're not Dostoyevsky,' said the woman to Koroviev.
‘ How do you know? '
'Dostoyevsky's dead,' said the woman, though not very confidently.
'I protest! ' exclaimed Behemoth warmly. ' Dostoyevsky is immortal!'
'Your membership cards, please,' said the woman.
'This is really all rather funny! ' said Koroviev, refusing to give
up. 'A writer isn't a writer because he has a membership card but because he
writes. How do you know what bright ideas may not be swarming in my head? Or
in his head? ' And he pointed at Behemoth's head. The cat removed its cap to
give the woman a better look at its head. ' Stand back, please,' she said,
irritated.
Koroviev and Behemoth stood aside and made way for a writer in a grey
suit and a white summer shirt with the collar turned out over his jacket
collar, no tie and a newspaper under his arm. The writer nodded to the woman
and scribbled a flourish in the book as he passed through to the verandah.
'We can't,' said Koroviev sadly,' but he can have that mug of cold
beer which you and I, poor wanderers, were so longing for. We are in an
unhappy position and I see no way out.'
Behemoth only spread his paws bitterly and put his cap back on his
thick head of hair that much resembled cat's fur.
At that moment a quiet but authoritative voice said to the woman :
'Let them in, Sofia Pavlovna.'
The woman with the ledger looked up in astonishment. From behind the
trellis foliage loomed the pirate's white shirt-front and wedge-shaped
beard. He greeted the two ruffians with a welcoming look and even went so
far as to beckon them on. Archibald Archibaldovich made his authority felt
in this restaurant and Sofia Pavlovna obediently asked Koroviev :
'What is your name? '
'Panayev,' was the polite reply. The woman wrote down the name and
raised her questioning glance to Behemoth.
'Skabichevsky,' squeaked the cat, for some reason pointing to his
Primus. Sofia Pavlovna inscribed this name too and pushed the ledger forward
for the two visitors to sign. Koroviev wrote ' Skabichevsky' opposite the
name ' Panayev' and Behemoth wrote ' Panayev ' opposite ' Skabichevsky '.
To Sofia Pavlovna's utter surprise Archibald Archibaldovich gave her a
seductive smile, led his guests to the best table on the far side of the
verandah where there was the most shade, where the sunlight danced round the
table through one of the gaps in the trellis. Blinking with perplexity,
Sofia Pavlovna stared for a long time at the two curious signatures.
The waiters were no less surprised. Archibald Archibaldovich personally
moved the chairs back from the table, invited Koroviev to be seated, winked
at one, whispered to the other, while two waiters fussed around the new
arrivals, one of whom put his Primus on the floor beside his reddish-brown
boot.
The old stained tabledoth vanished instantly from the table and
another, whiter than a bedouin's burnous, flashed through the air in a
crackle of starch as Archibald Archibaldovich whispered, softly, but most
expressively, into Koroviev's ear :
'What can I offer you? I've a rather special fillet of smoked sturgeon
... I managed to save it from the architectural congress banquet...'
'Er . . . just bring us some hors d'oeuvres . . .' boomed Koroviev
patronisingly, sprawling in his chair.
'Of course,' replied Archibald Archibaldovich, closing his eyes in
exquisite comprehension.
Seeing how the maitre d'hotel was treating these two dubious guests,
the waiters abandoned their suspicions and set about their work seriously.
One offered a match to Behemoth, who had taken a butt-end out of his pocket
and stuck it in his mouth, another advanced in a tinkle of green glass and
laid out tumblers, claret-glasses and those tall-stemmed white wine glasses
which are so perfect for drinking a sparkling wine under the awning-- or
rather, moving on in time, which used to be so perfect for drinking
sparkling wine under the verandah awning at Griboyedov.

'A little breast of grouse, perhaps? ' said Archibald Archibaldovich
in a musical purr. The guest in the shaky pince-nez thoroughly approved the
pirate captain's suggestion and beamed at him through his one useless lens.
Petrakov-Sukhovei, the essayist, was dining at the next table with his
wife and had just finished eating a pork chop. With typical writer's
curiosity he had noticed the fuss that Archibald Archibaldovich was making
and was extremely surprised. His wife, a most dignified lady, felt jealous
of the pirate's attention to Koroviev and tapped her glass with a spoon as a
sign of impatience . . . where's my ice-cream? What's happened to the
service? With a flattering smile at Madame Petrakov, Archibald
Archibaldovich sent a waiter to her and stayed with his two special
customers. Archibald Archibaldovich was not only intelligent;
he was at least as observant as any writer. He knew all about the show
at the Variety and much else besides ; he had heard, and unlike most people
he had not forgotten, the words' checks ' and ' cat'. Archibald
Archibaldovich had immediately guessed who his clients were and realising
this, he was not going to risk having an argument with them. And Sofia
Pavlovna had tried to stop them coming on to the verandah! Still, what else
could you expect from her. . . .
Haughtily spooning up her melting ice-cream, Madame Petrakov watched
disagreeably as the table, occupied by what appeared to be a couple of
scarecrows, was loaded with food as if by magic. A bowl of fresh caviar,
garnished with sparkling lettuce leaves . . . another moment, and a silver
ice-bucket appeared on a special little side-table . . .
Only when he had made sure that all was properly in hand and when the
waiters had brought a simmering chafing-dish, did Archibald Archibaldovich
allow himself to leave his two mysterious guests, and then only after
whispering to them:
'Please excuse me--I must go and attend to the grouse!'
He fled from the table and disappeared inside the restaurant. If anyone
had observed what Archibald Archibaldovich did next, they might have thought
it rather strange.
The maitre d'hotel did not make for the kitchen to attend to the
grouse, but instead went straight to the larder. Opening it with his key, he
locked himself in, lifted two heavy fillets of smoked sturgeon out of the
ice box, taking care not to dirty his shirt-cuffs, wrapped them in
newspaper, carefully tied them up with string and put them to one side. Then
he went next door to check whether his silk-lined overcoat and hat were
there, and only then did he pass on to the kitchen, where the chef was
carefully slicing the breast of grouse.
Odd though Archibald Archibaldovich's movements may have seemed, they
were not, and would only have seemed so to a superficial observer. His
actions were really quite logical. His knowledge of recent events and above
all his phenomenal sixth sense told the Griboyedov maitre d'hotel that
although his two guests' meal would be plentiful and delicious, it would be
extremely short. And this ex-buccaneer's sixth sense, which had never yet
played him false, did not let him down this time, either.
Just as Koroviev and Behemoth were clinking their second glass of
delicious, chilled, double-filtered Moscow vodka, a journalist called Boba
Kaudalupsky, famous in Moscow for knowing everything that was going on,
arrived on the verandah sweating with excitement and immediately sat down at
the Petrakovs' table. Dropping his bulging briefcase on the table, Boba put
his lips to Petrakov's ear and whispered some obviously fascinating piece of
news. Dying with curiosity, madame Petra-kov leaned her ear towards Boba's
thick, fleshy lips. With furtive glances the journalist whispered on and on,
just loud enough for occasional words to be heard :
'I promise you! . . . Here, on Sadovaya Street. . .! ' Boba lowered
his voice again. ' . . . the bullets couldn't hit it ... bullets . . .
paraffin . . . fire . . . bullets . . .'
'Well, as for liars who spread rumours like that,' came madame
Petrakov's contralto boom, a shade too loud for Boba's liking, ' they're the
ones who should be shot! And they would be if I had my way. What a lot of
dangerous rubbish! '
'It's not rubbish Antonia Porfiryevna,' exclaimed Boba, piqued at her

disbelief. He began hissing again: ' I tell you, bullets couldn't touch it!
... And now the building's on fire . . . they floated out through the air
... through the air!' whispered Boba, never suspecting that the people he
was talking about were sitting alongside him and thoroughly enjoying the
situation.
However, their enjoyment was soon cut short. Three men, tightly belted,
booted and armed with revolvers, dashed out of the indoor restaurant and on
to the verandah. The man in front roared:
‘ Don't move!' and instantly all three opened fire at the heads of
Koroviev and Behemoth. The two victims melted into the air and a sheet of
flame leaped up from the Primus to the awning. A gaping mouth with burning
edges appeared in the awning and began spreading in all directions. The fire
raced across it and reached the roof of Griboyedov House. Some bundles of
paper lying on the second-floor windowsill of the editor's office burst into
flame, which spread to a blind and then, as though someone had blown on it,
the fire was sucked, roaring, into the house.
A few seconds later the writers, their suppers abandoned, were
streaming along the asphalted paths leading to the iron railings along the
boulevard, where on Wednesday evening Ivan had climbed over to bring the
first incomprehensible news of disaster.
Having left in good time by a side door, without running and in no
hurry, like a captain forced to be the last to leave his flaming brig,
Archibald Archibaldovich calmly stood and watched it all. He wore his
silk-lined overcoat and two fillets of smoked sturgeon were tucked under his
arm.

29. The Fate of the Master and Margarita is Decided

At sunset, high above the town, on the stone roof of one of the most
beautiful buildings in Moscow, built about a century and a half ago, stood
two figures--Woland and Azazello. They were invisible from the street below,
hidden from the vulgar gaze by a balustrade adorned with stucco flowers in
stucco urns, although they could see almost to the limits of the city.
Woland was sitting on a folding stool, dressed in his black soutane.
His long, broad-bladed sword had been rammed vertically into the cleft
between two flagstones, making a sundial. Slowly and inexorably the shadow
of the sword was lengthening, creeping towards Satan's black slippers.
Resting his sharp chin on his fist, hunched on the stool with one leg
crossed over the other, Woland stared unwaveringly at the vast panorama of
palaces, huge blocks of flats and condemned slum cottages.
Azazello, without his usual garb of jacket, bowler and patent-leather
shoes and dressed instead like Woland in black, stood motionless at a short
distance from his master, also staring at the city.
Woland remarked:
'An interesting city, Moscow, don't you think? '
Azazello stirred and answered respectfully :
'I prefer Rome, messire.'
'Yes, it's a matter of taste,' replied Woland.
After a while his voice rang out again:
'What is that smoke over there--on the boulevard? ' ' That is
Griboyedov burning,' said Azazello.
'I suppose that inseparable couple, Koroviev and Behemoth, have been
there? '
'Without a doubt, messire.'
There was silence again and both figures on the roof stood watching the
setting sun reflected in all the westward-facing windows. Woland's eyes
shone with the same fire, even though he sat with his back to the sunset.
Then something made Woland turn his attention to a round tower behind

him on the roof. From its walls appeared a grim, ragged, mud-spattered man
with a beard, dressed in a chiton and home-made sandals.
'Ha! ' exclaimed Wolaud, with a sneer at the approaching figure. ' You
are the last person I expected to see here. What brings you here, of all
people? '
'I have come to see you, spirit of evil and lord of the shadows,' the
man replied with a hostile glare at Woland.
'Well, tax-gatherer, if you've come to see me, why don't you wish me
well? '
'Because I have no wish to see you well,' said the man impudently.
'Then I am afraid you will have to reconcile yourself to my good
health,' retorted Woland, his mouth twisted into a grin. ' As soon as you
appeared on this roof you made yourself ridiculous. It was your tone of
voice. You spoke your words as though you denied the very existence of the
shadows or of evil. Think, now : where would your good be if there were no
evil and what would the world look like without shadow? Shadows are thrown
by people and things. There's the shadow of my sword, for instance. But
shadows are also cast by trees and living things. Do you want to strip the
whole globe by removing every tree and every creature to satisfy your
fantasy of a bare world? You're stupid.'
'I won't argue with you, old sophist,' replied Matthew the Levite.
'You are incapable of arguing with me for the reason I have just
mentioned--you are too stupid,' answered Woland and enquired: ' Now tell me
briefly and without boring me why you are here? '
'He has sent me.'
'What message did he give you, slave? '
'I am not a slave,' replied Matthew the Levite, growing angrier, ' I
am his disciple.'
'You and I are speaking different languages, as always,' said Woland,
' but that does not alter the things we are talking about. Well?'
'He has read the master's writings,' said Matthew the Levite, ' and
asks you to take the master with you and reward him by granting him peace.
Would that be hard for you to do, spirit of evil?'
'Nothing is hard for me to do,' replied Woland, ' as you well know.'
He paused for a while and then added : ' Why don't you take him yourself, to
the light? '
'He has not earned light, he has earned rest,' said the Levite sadly.
'Tell him it shall be done,' said Woland, adding with a flash in his
eye : ' And leave me this instant.'
'He asks you also to take the woman who loved him and who has suffered
for him,' Matthew said to Woland, a note of entreaty in his voice for the
first time.
'Do you think that we needed you to make us think of that? Go away.'
Matthew the Levite vanished and Woland called to Azazello :
'Go and see them and arrange it.'
Azazello flew off, leaving Woland alone.
He was not, however, alone for long. The sound of footsteps and
animated voices were heard along the roof, and Koroviev and Behemoth
appeared. This time the cat had no Primus but was loaded with other things.
It was carrying a small gold-framed landscape under one arm, a half-burned
cook's apron in its paw, and on its other arm was a whole salmon complete
with skin and tail. Both Koroviev and Behemoth smclled of burning.
Behemoth's face was covered in soot and his cap was badly burned.
'Greetings, messire,' cried the tireless pair, and Behemoth waved his
salmon.
'You're a fine couple,' said Woland.
'Imagine, messire! ' cried Behemoth excitedly : ' they thought I was
looting! '
'Judging by that stuff,' replied Woland with a glance at the painting,
' they were right.'
'Believe me, messire . . .' the cat began in an urgently sincere
voice.
'No, I don't believe you,' was Woland's short answer.
'Messire, I swear I made heroic efforts to save everything I could,

but this was all that was left.'
‘ It would be more interesting if you were to explain why Griboyedov
caught fire in the first place.'
Simultaneously Koroviev and Behemoth spread their hands and raised
their eyes to heaven. Behemoth exclaimed: ' It's a complete mystery! There
we were, harming no one, sitting quietly having a drink and a bite to eat
when . . .'
'. . . Suddenly--bang, bang, bang! We were being shot at! Crazed with
fright Behemoth and I started running for the street, our pursuers behind
us, and we made for Timiryazev! '
'But a sense of duty,' put in Behemoth, ' overcame our cowardice and
we went back.'
'Ah, you went back did you? ' said Woland. ' By then, of course, the
whole house was burnt to a cinder.'
'To a cinder! ' Koroviev nodded sadly. ' Literally to a cinder, as you
so accurately put it. Nothing but smouldering ashes.'
'I rushed into the assembly hall,' said Behemoth, '--the col-onnaded
room, messire--in case I could save something valuable. Ah, messire, if I
had a wife she would have been nearly widowed at least twenty times! Luckily
I'm not married and believe me I'm glad. Who'd exchange a bachelor's life
for a yoke round his neck?'
'More of his rubbish,' muttered Woland with a resigned glance upwards.
'Messire, I promise to keep to the point,' said the cat. ' As I was
saying--I could only save this little landscape. There was no time to
salvage anything else, the flames were singeing my fur. I ran to the larder
and rescued this salmon, and into the kitchen where I found this chef's
overall. I consider I did everything I could, messire, and I fail to
understand the sceptical expression on your face.'
'And what was Koroviev doing while you were looting? ' enquired
Woland.
'I was helping the fire brigade, messire,' answered Koroviev, pointing
to his torn trousers.
'In that case I suppose it was totally destroyed and they will have to
put up a new building.'
'It will be built, messire,' said Koroviev, ' I can assure you of
that.'
'Well, let us hope it will be better than the old one,' remarked
Woland.
'It will, messire,' said Koroviev.
'Believe me, it will,' added the cat. ' My sixth sense tells me
so.
'Nevertheless here we are, messire,' Koroviev reported, ' and we await
your instructions.'
Woland rose from his stool, walked over to the balustrade and turning
his back on his retinue stared for a long time over the city in lonely
silence. Then he turned back, sat down on his stool again and said :
'I have no instructions. You have done all you could and for the time
being I no longer require your services. You may rest. A thunderstorm is
coming and then we must be on our way.'
‘ Very good, messire,' replied the two buffoons and vanished behind the
round tower in the centre of the roof.
The thunderstorm that Woland bad predicted was already gathering on the
horizon. A black cloud was rising in the west;
first a half and then all of the sun was blotted out. The wind on the
terrace freshened. Soon it was quite dark.
The cloud from the west enveloped the vast city. Bridges, buildings,
were all swallowed up. Everything vanished as though it had never been. A
single whip-lash of fire cracked across the sky, then the city rocked to a
clap of thunder. There came another ; the storm had begun. In the driving
rain Woland was no more to be seen.

30. Time to Go

'Do you know,' said Margarita, ' that just as you were going to sleep
last night I was reading about the mist that came in from the Mediterranean
. . . and those idols, ah, those golden idols! Somehow I co'uldn't get them
out of my mind. I think it's going to rain soon. Can you feel how it's
freshening? '
'That's all very fine,' replied the master, smoking and fanning the
smoke away with his hand. ' loot's forget about the idols . . . but what's
to become of us now, I'd like to know? '
This conversation took place at sunset, just when Matthew the Levite
appeared to Woland on the roof. The basement window was open and if anybody
had looked into it he would have been struck by the odd appearance of the
two people. Margarita had a plain black gown over her naked body and the
master was in his hospital pyjamas. Margarita had nothing else to wear. She
had left all her clothes at home and although her top-floor flat was not far
away there was, of course, no question of her going there to collect her
belongings. As for the master, all of whose suits were back in the wardrobe
as though he had never left, he simply did not feel like getting dressed
because, as he explained to Margarita, he had a premonition that some more
nonsense might be on the way. He had, however, had his first proper shave
since that autumn night, because the hospital staff had done no more than
trim his beard with electric clippers.
The room, too, looked strange and it was hard to discern any order
beneath the chaos. Manuscripts lay all over the floor and the divan. A Ibook
was lying, spine upwards, on the armchair. The round table was laid for
supper, several bottles standing among the plates of food. Margarita and the
master had no idea where all this food and drink had come from--it had
simply been there on the table when they woke up.
Having slept until Saturday evening both the master and his love felt
completely revived and only one symptom reminded them of their adventures of
the night before--both of them felt a slight ache in the left temple.
Psychologically both of them had changed considerably, as anyone would have
realised who overheard their conversation. But there was no one to overhear
them. The advantage of the little yard was that it was always empty. The
lime tree and the maple, turning greener with every day, exhaled the perfume
of spring and the rising breeze carried it into the basement.
'The devil! ' the master suddenly exclaimed. ' Just think of it . . .'
He stubbed out his cigarette in the ashtray and clasped his head in his
hands. ' Listen--you're intelligent and you haven't been in the madhouse as
I have ... do you seriously believe that we spent last night with Satan? '
'Quite seriously, I do . . .'
'Oh, of course, of course,' said the master ironically. ' There are
obviously two lunatics in the family now--husband and wife!' He raised his
arms to heaven and shouted : ' No, the devil knows what it was! . . .'
Instead of replying Margarita collapsed onto the divan, burst into
laughter, waved her bare legs in the air and practically shouted :
'Oh, I can't help it ... I can't help it ... If you could only see
yourself! '
When the master, embarrassed, had buttoned up his hospital pants,
Margarita grew serious.
'Just now you unwittingly spoke the truth,' she said. ' The devil does
know what it was and the devil believe me, will arrange everything! ' Her
eyes suddenly flashed, she jumped up, danced for joy and shouted: ' I'm so
happy, so happy, happy, that I made that bargain with him! Hurrah for the
devil! I'm afraid, my dear, that you're doomed to live with a witch! ' She
flung herself at the master, clasped him round the neck and began kissing
his lips, his nose, his cheeks. Floods of unkempt black hair caressed the
master's neck and shoulders while his face burned with kisses.
'You really are like a witch.'
'I don't deny it,' replied Margarita. ' I'm a witch and I'm very glad
of it.'

'All right,' said the master,' so you're a witch. Fine, splendid.
They've abducted me from the hospital--equally splendid. And they've brought
us back here, let us grant them that too. Let's even assume that neither of
us will be caught . . . But what, in the name of all that's holy, are we
supposed to live on? Tell me that, will you? You seem to care so little
about the problem that it really worries me.'
Just then a pair of blunt-toed boots and the lower part of a pair of
trousers appeared in the little basement window. Then the trousers bent at
the knee and the daylight was shut out by a man's ample bottom.
'Aloysius--are you there, Aloysius? ' asked a voice from slightly
above the trousers.
'It's beginning,' said the master.
'Aloysius? ' asked Margarita, moving closer to the window. ' He was
arrested yesterday. Who wants him? What's your name?'
Instantly the knees and bottom vanished, there came the click of the
gate and everything returned to normal. Again, Margarita collapsed on to the
divan and laughed until tears started from her eyes. When the fit was over
her expression changed completely, she grew serious, slid down from the
divan and crawled over to the master's knees. Staring him in the eyes, she
began to stroke his head.
'How you've suffered, my poor love! I'm the only one who knows how
much you've suffered. Look, there are grey and white threads in your hair
and hard lines round your mouth. My sweetest love, forget everything and
stop worrying. You've had to do too much thinking ; now I'm going to think
for you. I swear to you that everything is going to be perfect! ' ' I'm not
afraid of anything, Margot,' the master suddenly replied, raising his head
and looking just as he had when he had created that world he had never seen
yet knew to be true. ' I'm not afraid, simply because I have been through
everything that a man can go through. I've been so frightened that nothing
frightens me any longer. But I feel sorry for you, Margot, that's the point,
that's why I keep coming back to the same question. Think, Margarita--why
ruin your life for a sick pauper? Go back home. I feel sorry for you, that's
why I say this.'
'Oh, dear, dear, dear,' whispered Margarita, shaking her tousled head,
' you weak, faithless, stupid man! Why do you think I spent the whole of
last night prancing about naked, why do you think I sold my human nature and
became a witch, why do you think I spent months in this dim, damp little
hole thinking of nothing but the storm over Jerusalem, why do you think I
cried my eyes out when you vanished? You know why--yet when happiness
suddenly descends on us and gives us everything, you want to get rid of me!
All right, I'll go. But you're a cruel, cruel man. You've become completely
heartless.'
Bitter tenderness filled the master's heart and without knowing why he
burst into tears as he fondled Margarita's hair. Crying too, she whispered
to him as her fingers caressed his temple :
'There are more than just threads . . . your head is turning white
under my eyes . . . my poor suffering head. Look at your eyes! Empty . . .
And your shoulders, bent with the weight they've borne . . . they've
crippled you . . .' Margarita faded into delirium, sobbing helplessly.
Then the master dried his eyes, raised Margarita from her knees, stood
up himself and said firmly :
'That will do. You've made me utterly ashamed. I'll never mention it
again, I promise. I know that we are both suffering from some mental
sickness which you have probably caught from me . . . Well, we must see it
through together.'
Margarita put her Ups close to the master's ear and whispered :
'I swear by your life, I swear by the astrologer's son you created
that all will be well!'
'All right, I'll believe yon,' answered the master with a smile,
adding : ' Where else can such wrecks as you and I find help except from the
supernatural? So let's see what we can find in the other world.'
'There, now you're like you used to be, you're laughing,' said
Margarita. ' To hell with all your long words! Supernatural or not
supernatural, what do- I care? I'm hungry!' And she dragged the master

towards the table.
'I can't feel quite sure that this food isn't going to disappear
through the floor in a puff of smoke or fly out of the window,' said the
master.
'I promise you it won't.'
At that moment a nasal voice was heard at the window :
'Peace be with you.'
The master was startled but Margarita, accustomed to the unfamiliar,
cried:
‘ It's Azazello! Oh, how nice!' And whispering to the master: ' You
see--they haven't abandoned us!' she ran to open the door.
'You should at least fasten the front of your dress,' the master
shouted after her.
'I don't care,' replied Margarita from the passage.
His blind eye glistening, Azazello came in, bowed and greeted the
master. Margarita cried :
‘ Oh, how glad I am! I've never been so happy in my life! Forgive me,
Azazello, for meeting you naked like this.'
Azazello begged her not to let it worry her, assuring Margarita that he
had not only seen plenty of naked women in his time but even women who had
been skinned alive. First putting down a bundle wrapped in dark cloith, he
took a seat at the table.
Margarita poured Azazello a brandy, which he drank with relish. The
master, without staring at him, gently scratched his left wrist under the
table, but it had no effect. Azazello did not vanish into thin air and there
was no reason why he should. There was nothing terrible about this stocky
little demon with red hair, except perhaps his wall eye, but that afflicts
plenty of quite unmagical people, and except for his slightly unusual dress
--a kind of cassock or cape--but ordinary people sometimes wear clothes like
that too. He drank his brandy like all good men do, a whole glassful at a
time and on an empty stomach. The same brandy was already beginning to make
the master's head buzz and he said to himself:
'No, Margarita's right... of course this creature is an emissary of
the devil. After all only the day before yesterday I was proving to Ivan
that he had met Satan at Patriarch's Ponds, yet now the thought seems to
frighten me and I'm inventing excuses like hypnosis and hallucinations . . .
Hypnotism--hell!'
He studied Azazello's face and was convinced that there was ai certain
constraint in his look, some thought which he was holding back. ' He's not
just here on a visit, he has been sent here for a purpose,' thought the
master.
His powers of observation had not betrayed him. After his third glass
of brandy, which had no apparent effect on him, Azazello said:
'I must say it's comfortable, this little basement of yours, isn't it?
The only question is--what on earth are you going to do with yourselves, now
that you're here? '
'That is just what I have been wondering,' said the masteir with a
smile.
'Why do you make me feel uneasy, Azazello?' asked Margarita.
'Oh, come now!' exclaimed Azazello, ' I wouldn't dream of doing
anything to upset you. Oh yes! I nearly forgot . . . messire sends his
greetings and asks me to invite you to take a little trip with him--if you'd
like to, of course. What do you say to that?'
Margarita gently kicked the master's foot under the table.
'With great pleasure,' replied the master, studying Azazello. who went
on:
'We hope Margarita Nikolayevna won't refuse? '
'Of course not,' said Margarita, again brushing the master's foot with
her own.
'Splendid!' cried Azazello. ' That's what I like to see-- one, two and
away! Not like the other day in the Alexander Gardens!'
'Oh, don't remind me of that, Azazello, I was so stupid then. But you
can't really blame me--one doesn't meet the devil every day!'
'More's the pity,' said Azazello. ' Think what fun it would be if you

did!'
'I love the speed,' said Margarita excitedly, ' I love the speed and I
love being naked . . . just like a bullet from a gun--bang! Ah, how he can
shoot!' cried Margarita turning to the master. ' He can hit any pip of a
card--under a cushion too!' Margarita was beginning to get drunk and her
eyes were sparkling.
'Oh--I nearly torgot something else, too,' exclaimed Azazello,
slapping himself on the forehead. ' What a fool I am! Messire has sent you a
present'--here he spoke to the master--' a bottle of wine. Please note that
it is the same wine that the Procurator of Judaea drank. Falernian.'
This rarity aroused great interest in both Margarita and the master.
Azazello drew a sealed wine jar, completely covered in mildew, out of a
piece of an old winding-sheet. They sniffed the wine, then poured it into
glasses and looked through it towards the window. The light was already
fading with the approach of the storm. Filtered through the glass, the light
turned everything to the colour of blood.
'To Woland! ' exclaimed Margarita, raising her glass.
All three put their lips to the glasses and drank a large mouthful.
Immediately the light began to fade before the master's eyes, his breath
came in gasps and he felt the end coming. He could just see Margarita,
deathly pale, helplessly stretch out her arms towards him, drop her head on
to the table and then slide to the floor.
'Poisoner . . .' the master managed to croak. He tried to snatch the
knife from the table to stab Azazello, but his hand slithered lifelessly
from the tablecloth, everything in the basement seemed to turn black and
then vanished altogether. He collapsed sideways, grazing his forehead on the
edge of the bureau as he fell.
When he was certain that the poison had taken effect, Azazello started
to act. First he flew out of the window and in a few moments he was in
Margarita's flat. Precise and efficient as ever, Azazello wanted to check
that everything necessary had been done. It had. Azazello saw a
depressed-looking woman, waiting for her husband to return, come out of her
bedroom and suddenly turn pale, clutch her heart and gasp helplessly :
'Natasha . . . somebody . . . help . . .' She fell to the drawing-room
floor before she had time to reach the study.
'All in order,' said Azazello. A moment later he was back with the
murdered lovers. Margarita lay face downward on the carpet. With his iron
hands Azazello turned her over like a doll and looked at her. The woman's
face changed before his eyes. Even in the twilight of the oncoming storm he
could see how her temporary witch's squint and her look of cruelty and
violence disappeared. Her expression relaxed and softened, her mouth lost
its predatory sneer and simply became the mouth of a woman in her last
agony. Then Azazello forced her white teeth apart and poured into her mouth
a few drops of the same wine that had poisoned her. Margarita sighed, rose
without Azazello's help, sat down and asked weakly :
'Why, Azazello, why? What have you done to me? '
She saw the master lying on the floor, shuddered and whispered:
'I didn't expect this . . . murderer! '
'Don't worry,' replied Azazello. ' He'll get up again in a minute. Why
must you be so nervous! '
He sounded so convincing that Margarita believed him at once. She
jumped up, alive and strong, and helped to give the master some of the wine.
Opening his eyes he gave a stare of grim hatred and repeated his last word :
'Poisoner . . .'
'Oh well, insults are the usual reward for a job well done!' said
Azazello. ' Are you blind? You'll soon see sense.'
The master got up, looked round briskly and asked :
'Now what does all this mean? '
'It means,' replied Azazello, ' that it's time for us to go. The
thunderstorm has already begun--can you hear? It's getting dark. The horses
are pawing the ground and making your little garden shudder. You must say
goodbye, quickly.'
'Ah, I understand,' said the master, gating round, ' you have killed
us. We are dead. How clever--and how timely. Now I see it all.'

'Oh come,' replied Azazello, ' what did I hear you say? Your beloved
calls you the master, you're an intelligent being--how can you be dead? It's
ridiculous . . '
'I understand what you mean,' cried the master, ' don't go on! You're
right--a thousand times right! '
'The great Woland! ' Margarita said to him urgently, ' the great
Woland! His solution was much better than mine! But the novel, the novel!'
she shouted at the master,' take the novel with you, wherever you may be
going! '
'No need,' replied the master,' I can remember it all by heart.'
'But you . . . you won't forget a word? ' asked Margarita, embracing
her lover and wiping the blood from his bruised forehead.
'Don't worry. I shall never forget anything again,' he answered.
'Then the fire! ' cried Azazello. ' The fire--where it all began and
where we shall end it! '
'The fire! ' Margarita cried in a terrible voice. The basement windows
were banging, the blind was blown aside by the wind. There was a short,
cheerful clap of thunder. Azazello thrust his bony hand into the stove,
pulled out a smouldering log and used it to light the tablecloth. Then he
set fire to a pile of old newspapers on the divan, then the manuscript and
the curtains.
The master, intoxicated in advance by the thought of the ride to come,
threw a book from the bookcase on to the table, thrust its leaves into the
burning tablecloth and the book burst merrily into flame. ' Burn away, past!
'
'Burn, suffering! ' cried Margarita.
Crimson pillars of fire were swaying all over the room, when the three
ran out of the smoking door, up the stone steps and out into the courtyard.
The first thing they saw was the landlord's cook sitting on the ground
surrounded by potato peelings and bunches of onions. Her position was hardly
surprising--three black horses were standing in the yard, snorting,
quivering and kicking up the ground in fountains. Margarita mounted the
first, then Azazello and the master last. Groaning, the cook was about to
raise her hand to make the sign of the cross when Azazello shouted
threateningly from the saddle :
'If you do, I'll cut off your arm! ' He whistled and the horses,
smashing the branches of the lime tree, whinnied and plunged upwards into a
low black cloud. From below came the cook's faint, pathetic cry :
'Fire . . .'
The horses were already galloping over the roofs of Moscow.
'I want to say goodbye to someone,' shouted the master to Azazello,
who was cantering along in front of him. Thunder drowned the end of the
master's sentence. Azazello nodded and urged his horse into a gallop. A
cloud was rushing towards them, though it had not yet begun to spatter rain.
They flew over the boulevard, watching as the little figures ran in all
directions to shelter from the rain. The first drops were falling. They flew
over a pillar of smoke--all that was left of Griboyedov. On they flew over
the city in the gathering darkness. Lightning flashed above them. Then the
roofs changed to treetops. Only then did the rain begin to lash them and
turned them into three great bubbles in the midst of endless water.
Margarita was already used to the sensation of flight, but the master
was not and he was amazed how quickly they reached their destination, where
he wished to say goodbye to the only other person who meant anything to him.
Through the veil of rain he immediately recognised Stravinsky's clinic, the
river and the pine-forest on the far bank that he had stared at for so long.
They landed among a clump of trees in a meadow not far from the clinic.
'I'll wait for you here,' shouted Azazello, folding his arms. For a
moment he was lit up by a flash of lightning then vanished again in the grey
pall. ' You can say goodbye, but hurry!'
The master and Margarita dismounted and flew, like watery shadows,
through the clinic garden. A moment later the master was pushing aside the
balcony grille of No. 117 with a practised hand. Margarita followed him.
They walked into Ivan's room, invisible and unnoticed, as the storm howled
and thundered. The master stopped by the bed.

Ivan was lying motionless, as he had been when he had first watched the
storm from his enforced rest-home. This time, however, he was not crying.
After staring for a while at the dark shape that entered his room from the
balcony, he sat up, stretched out his arms and said joyfully :
'Oh, it's you! I've been waiting for you! It's you, my neighbour!'
To this the master answered :
‘ Yes, it's me, but I'm afraid I shan't be your neighbour any longer. I
am flying away for ever and I've only come to say goodbye.'
'I knew, I guessed,' replied Ivan quietly, then asked :
'Did you meet him? '
'Yes,' said the master, ' I have come to say goodbye to you because
you're the only person I have been able to talk to in these last days.'
Ivan beamed and said :
'I'm so glad you came. You see, I 'm going to keep my word, I shan't
write any more stupid poetry. Something else interests me now--' Ivan smiled
and stared crazily past the figure of the master--' I want to write
something quite different. I have come to understand a lot of things since
I've been lying here.'
The master grew excited at this and said as he sat down on the edge of
Ivan's bed:
'That's good, that's good. You must write the sequel to it.'
Ivan's eyes sparkled.
'But won't you be writing it?' Then he looked down and added
thoughtfully : ' Oh, yes, of course . . . what am I saying.' Ivan stared at
the ground, frightened.
'No,' said the master, and his voice seemed to Ivan unfamiliar and
hollow. ' I won't write about him any more. I shall be busy with other
things.'
The roar of the storm was pierced by a distant whistle.
'Do you hear? ' asked the master.
'The noise of the storm . . .'
'No, they're calling me, it's time for me to go,' explained the master
and got up from the bed.
'Wait! One more thing,' begged Ivan. ' Did you find her? Had she been
faithful to you? '
'Here she is,' replied the master, pointing to the wall. The dark
figure of Margarita materialised from the wall and moved over to the bed.
She looked at the young man in the bed and her eyes filled with sorrow.
'Poor, poor boy . . .' she whispered silently, and bent over the bed.
'How beautiful she is,' said Ivan, without envy but sadly and
touchingly. ' Everything has worked out wonderfully for you, you lucky
fellow. And here am I, sick . . .' He thought for a moment, then added
thoughtfully : ' Or perhaps I'm not so sick after all . . .'
'That's right,' whispered Margarita, bending right down to Ivan. '
I'll kiss you and everything will be as it should be ... believe me, I know
. . .'
Ivan put his arms round her neck and she kissed him.
'Farewell, disciple,' said the master gently and began to melt into
the air. He vanished, Margarita with him. The grille closed.
Ivan felt uneasy. He sat up in bed, gazing round anxiously, groaned,
talked to himself, got up. The storm was raging with increasing violence and
it was obviously upsetting him. It upset him so much that his hearing,
lulled by the permanent silence, caught the sound of anxious footsteps,
murmured voices outside his door. Trembling, he called out irritably :
'Praskovya Fyodorovna!'
As the nurse came into the room, she gave Ivan a -worried, enquiring
look:
'What's the matter? ' she asked. ' Is the storm frightening you? Don't
worry--I'll bring you something in a moment . . . I'll call the doctor right
away . . .'
'No, Praskovya Fyodorovna, you needn't call the doctor,' said Ivan,
staring anxiously not at her but at the wall, ' there's nothing particularly
wrong with me. I'm in my right mind now, don't be afraid. But you might tell
me,' asked Ivan confidentially, ' what has just happened next door in No.

118? '
'In 118? ' Praskovya Fyodorovna repeated hesitantly. Her eyes flickered
in embarrassment. ' Nothing has happened there.' But her voice betrayed her.
Ivan noticed this at once and said:
'Oh, Praskovya Fyodorovna! You're such a truthful person . . . Are you
afraid I'll get violent? No, Praskovya Fyodorovna, I won't. You had better
tell me, you see I can sense it all through that wall.'
'Your neighbour has just died,' whispered Praskovya Fyodorovna, unable
to overcome her natural truthfulness and goodness, and she gave a frightened
glance at Ivan, who was suddenly clothed in lightning. But nothing terrible
happened. He only raised his finger and said :
'I knew it! I am telling you, Praskovya Fyodorovna, that another
person has just died in Moscow too. I even know who ' --here Ivan smiled
mysteriously--' it is a woman!'

31. On Sparrow Hills

The storm had passed and a rainbow had arched itself across the sky,
its foot in the Moscow River. On top of a hill between two clumps of trees
could be seen three dark silhouettes. Woland, Koroviev and Behemoth sat
mounted on black horses, looking at the city spread out beyond the river
with fragments of sun glittering from thousands of west-facing windows, and
at the onion domes of the Novodevichy monastery.
There was a rustling in the air and Azazello, followed in a black
cavalcade by the master and Margarita, landed by the group of waiting
figures.
'I'm afraid we had to frighten you a little, Margarita Nikolay-evna,
and you, master,' said Woland after a pause. ' But I don't think you will
have cause to complain to me about it or regret it. Now,' he turned to the
master, ' say goodbye to this city. It's time for us to go.' Woland pointed
his hand in its black gauntlet to where countless glass suns glittered
beyond the river, where above those suns the city exhaled the haze, smoke
and steam of the day.
The master leaped from his saddle, left his companions and ran to the
hillside, black cloak flapping over the ground behind him. He looked at the
city. For the first few moments a tremor of sadness crept over his heart,
but it soon changed to a delicious excitement, the gypsy's thrill of the
open road.
'For ever ... I must think what that means,' whispered the master, and
locked his dry, cracked lips. He began to listen to what was happening in
his heart. His excitement, it seemed to him, had given way to a profound and
grievous sense of hurt. But it was only momentary and gave place to one of
proud indifference and finally to a presentiment of eternal peace.
The party of riders waited for the master in silence. They •watched the
tall, black figure on the hillside gesticulate, then raise his head as
though trying to cast his glance over the whole city and to look beyond its
edge ; then he hung his head as if he were studying the sparse, trampled
grass under his feet.
Behemoth, who was getting bored, broke the silence :
'Please, man maitre,' he said, ' let me give a farewell whistle-call.'
'You might frighten the lady,' replied Woland, ' besides, don't forget
that you have done enough fooling about for one visit. Behave yourself now.'
'Oh no, messire,' cried Margarita, sitting her mount like an Amazon,
one arm akimbo, her long black train reaching to the ground. ' Please let
him whistle. I feel sad at the thought of the journey. It's quite a natural
feeling, even when you know it will end in happiness. If you won't let him
make us laugh, I shall cry, and the journey will be ruined before we start.'

Woland nodded to Behemoth. Delighted, the cat leaped to the ground, out
its paws in its mouth, filled its cheeks and whistled.
Margarita's ears sang. Her horse roared, twigs snapped off nearby
trees, a flock of rooks and crows flew up, a cloud of dust billowed towards
the river and several passengers on a river steamer below had their hats
blown off.
The whistle-blast made the master flinch; he did not turn round, but
began gesticulating even more violently, raising his fist skywards as though
threatening the city. Behemoth looked proudly round.
'You whistled, I grant you,' said Koroviev condescendingly. ' But
frankly it was a very mediocre whistle.'
'I'm not a choirmaster, though,' said Behemoth with dignity, puffing
out his chest and suddenly winking at Margarita.
'Let me have a try, just for old time's sake,' said Koroviev. He
rubbed his hands and blew on his fingers.
'Very well,' said Woland sternly, ' but without endangering life or
limb, please.'
'Purely for fun, I promise you, messire,' Koroviev assured him, hand
on heart. He suddenly straightened up, seemed to stretch as though he were
made of rubber, waved the fingers of his right hand, wound himself up like a
spring and then, suddenly uncoiling, he whistled.
Margarita did not hear this whistle, but she felt it, as she and her
horse were picked up and thrown twenty yards sideways. Beside her the bark
was ripped off an oak tree and cracks opened in the ground as far as the
river. The water in it boiled and heaved and a river steamer, with all its
passengers unharmed, was grounded on the far bank by the blast. A jackdaw,
killed by Faggot's whistle, fell at the feet of Margarita's snorting horse.
This time the master was thoroughly frightened and ran back to his
waiting companions.
'Well,' said Woland to him from the saddle, ' have you made your
farewell?'
'Yes, I have,' said the master and boldly returned Woland's stare.
Then like the blast of a trumpet the terrible voice of Woland rang out
over the hills :
'It is time!'
As an echo came a piercing laugh and a whistle from Behemoth. The
horses leaped into the air and the riders rose with them as they galloped
upwards. Margarita could feel her fierce horse biting and tugging at the
bit. Woland's cloak billowed out over the heads of the cavalcade and as
evening drew on, his cloak began to cover the whole vault of the sky. When
the black veil blew aside for a moment, Margarita turned round in flight and
saw that not only the many-coloured towers but the whole city had long
vanished from sight, swallowed by the earth, leaving only mist and smoke
where it had been.

32. Absolution and Eternal Refuge

How sad, ye gods, how sad the world is at evening, how mysterious the
mists over the swamps. You will know it when vou have wandered astray in
those mists, when you have suffered greatly before dying, when you have
walked through the world carrying an unbearable burden. You know it too when
you are weary and ready to leave this earth without regret; its mists, its
swamps and its rivers ; ready to give yourself into the arms of death with a
light heart, knowing that death alone can comfort you.
The magic black horses were growing tired, carrying their riders more
slowly as inexorable night began to overtake them. Sensing it behind him
even the irrepressible Behemoth was hushed, and digging his claws into the
saddle he flew on in silence, his tail streaming behind him.

Night laid its black cloth over forest and meadow, night lit a
scattering of sad little lights far away below, lights that for Margarita
and the master were now meaningless and alien. Night overtook the cavalcade,
spread itself over them from above and began to seed the lowering sky with
white specks of stars.
Night thickened, flew alongside, seized the riders' cloaks and pulling
them from their shoulders, unmasked their disguises. When Margarita opened
her eyes in the freshening wind she saw the features of all the galloping
riders change, and when a full, purple moon rose towards them over the edge
of a forest, all deception vanished and fell away into the marsh beneath as
their magical, trumpery clothing faded into the mist.
It would have been hard now to recognise Koroviev-Faggot, self-styled
interpreter to the mysterious professor who needed none, in the figure who
now rode immediately alongside Woland at Margarita's right hand. In place of
the person who had left Sparrow Hills in shabby circus clothes under the
name of Koroviev-Faggot, there now galloped, the gold chain of his bridle
chinking softly, a knight clad in dark violet with a grim and unsmiling
face. He leaned his chin on his chest, looked neither at the moon nor the
earth, thinking his own thoughts as he flew along beside Woland.
'Why has he changed so? ' Margarita asked Woland above the hiss of the
wind.
'That knight once made an ill-timed joke,' replied Woland, turning his
fiery eye on Margarita. ' Once when we were talking of darkness and light he
made a somewhat unfortunate pun. As a penance he was condemned to spend
rather more rime as a practical joker than he had bargained for. But tonight
is one of those moments when accounts are settled. Our knight has paid his
score and the account is closed.'
Night stripped away, too. Behemoth's fluffy tail and his fur and
scattered it in handfuls. The creature who had been the pet of the prince of
darkness was revealed as a slim youth, a page-demon, the greatest jester
that there has ever been. He too was now silent and flew without a sound,
holding up Us young face towards the light that poured from the moon.
On the flank, gleaming in steel armour, rode Azazello, his face
transformed by the moon. Gone was the idiotic wall eye, gone was his false
squint. Both Azazello's eyes were alike, empty and black, his face white and
cold. Azazello was now in his real guise, the demon of the waterless desert,
the murderer-demon.
Margarita could not see herself but she could see the change that had
come ove the master. His hair had whitened in the moonlight and had gathered
behind him into a mane that flew in the wind. Whenever the wind blew the
master's cloak away from his legs, Margarita could see the spurs that winked
at the heels of his jackboots. Like the page-demon the master rode staring
at the moon, though smiling at it as though it were a dear, familiar friend,
and--a habit acquired in room No. 118-- talking to himself.
Woland, too, rode in his true aspect. Margarita could not say what the
reins of his horse were made of; she thought that they might be strings of
moonlight and the horse itself only a blob of darkness, its mane a cloud and
its rider's spurs glinting stars.
They rode for long in silence until the country beneath began to
change. The grim forests slipped away into the gloom below, drawing with
them the dull curved blades of rivers. The moonlight was now reflected from
scattered boulders with dark gulleys between them.
Woland reined in his horse on the flat, grim top of a hill and the
riders followed him at a walk, hearing the crunch of flints and pebbles
under the horses' shoes. The moon flooded the ground with a harsh green
light and soon Margarita noticed on the bare expanse a chair, with the vague
figure of a man seated on it, apparently deaf or lost in thought. He seemed
not to hear the stony ground shuddering beneath the weight of the horses and
he remained unmoved as the riders approached.
In the brilliant moonlight, brighter than an arc-light, Margarita could
see the seemingly blind man wringing his hands and staring at the moon with
unseeing eyes. Then she saw that beside the massive stone chair, which
sparkled fitfully in the moonlight, there lay a huge, grey dog with pointed
ears, gazing like his master, at the moon. At the man's feet were the

fragments of a jug and a reddish-black pool of liquid. The riders halted.
'We have read your novel,' said Woland, turning to the master,' and we
can only say that unfortunately it is not finished. I would like to show you
your hero. He has been sitting here and sleeping for nearly two thousand
years, but when the full moon comes he is tortured, as you see, with
insomnia. It plagues not only him, but his faithful guardian, his dog. If it
is true that cowardice is the worst sin of all, then the dog at least is not
guilty of it. The only thing that frightened this brave animal was a
thunderstorm. But one who loves must share the fate of his loved one.' '
What is he saying?' asked Margarita, and her calm face was veiled with
compassion.
'He always says ' said Woland, ' the same thing. He is saying that
there is no peace for him by moonlight and that his duty is a hard one. He
says it always, whether he is asleep or awake, and he always sees the same
thing--a path of moonlight. He longs to walk along it and talk to his
prisoner, Ha-Notsri, because he claims he had more to say to him on that
distant fourteenth day of Nisan. But he never succeeds in reaching that path
and no one ever comes near him. So it is not surprising that he talks to
himself. For an occasional change he adds that most of all he detests his
immortality and his incredible fame. He claims that he would gladly change
places with that vagrant, Matthew the Levite.'
'Twenty-four thousand moons in penance for one moon long ago, isn't
that too much? ' asked Margarita.
'Are you going to repeat the business with Frieda again?' said Woland.
' But you needn't distress yourself, Margarita. All will be as it should ;
that is how the world is made.'
'Let him go! ' Margarita suddenly shouted in a piercing voice, as she
had shouted when she was a witch. Her cry shattered a rock in the
mountainside, sending it bouncing down into the abyss with a deafening
crash, but Margarita could not tell if it was the falling rock or the sound
of satanic laughter. Whether it was or not, Woland laughed and said to
Margarita :
'Shouting at the mountains will do no good. Landslides are common here
and he is used to them by now. There is no need for you to plead for him,
Margarita, because his cause has already been pleaded by the man he longs to
join.' Woland turned round to the master and went on: ' Now is your chance
to complete your novel with a single sentence.'
The master seemed to be expecting this while he had been standing
motionless, watching the seated Procurator. He cupped his hands to a trumpet
and shouted with such force that the echo sprang back at him from the bare,
treeless hills :
'You are free! Free! He is waiting for you!'
The mountains turned the master's voice to thunder and the thunder
destroyed them. The grim cliffsides crumbled and fell. Only the platform
with the stone chair remained. Above the black abyss into which the
mountains had vanished glowed a great city topped by glittering idols above
a garden overgrown with the luxuriance of two thousand years. Into the
garden stretched the Procurator's long-awaited path of moonlight and the
first to bound along it was the dog with pointed ears. The man in the white
cloak with the blood-red lining rose from his chair and shouted something in
a hoarse, uneven voice. It was impossible to tell if he was laughing or
crying, or what he was shouting. He could only be seen hurrying along the
moonlight path after his faithful watchdog.
'Am I to follow him? ' the master enquired uneasily, with a touch on
his reins.
'No,' answered Woland, ' why try to pursue what is completed? '
'That way, then?' asked the master, turning and pointing back to where
rose the city they had just left, with its onion-domed monasteries,
fragmented sunlight reflected in its windows.
'No, not that way either,' replied Woland, his voice rolling down the
hillsides like a dense torrent. ' You are a romantic, master! Your novel has
been read by the man that your hero Pilate, whom you have just released, so
longs to see.' Here Woland turned to Margarita : ' Margarita Nikolayevna! I
am convinced that you have done your utmost to devise the best possible

future for the master, but believe me, what I am offering you and what
Yeshua has begged to be given to you is even better! Let us leave them alone
with each other,' said Woland, leaning out of his saddle towards the master
and pointing to the departing Procurator. ' Let's not disturb them. Who
knows, perhaps they may agree on something.'
At this Woland waved his hand towards Jerusalem, which vanished.
'And there too,' Woland pointed backwards. ' What good is your little
basement now? ' The reflected sun faded from the windows. ' Why go back? '
Woland continued, quietly and persuasively. ' 0 thrice romantic master,
wouldn't you like to stroll under the cherry blossom with your l.ove in the
daytime and listen to Schubert in the evening? Won't you enjoy writing by
candlelight with a goose quill? Don't you want, like Faust, to sit over a
retort in the hope of fashioning a new homunculus? That's where you must
go--where a house and an old servant are already waiting for you and the
candle;s are lit--although they are soon to be put out because you will
arrive at dawn. That is your way, master, that way! Farewell--I must go!'
'Farewell! ' cried Margarita and the master together. Then the black
Woland, taking none of the paths, dived into the abyss, followed with a roar
by his retinue. The mountains, the platform, the moonbeam pathway,
Jerusalem--all were gone. The black horses, too, had vanished. The master
and Margarita saw the promised dawn, which rose in instant succession to the
midnight moon. In the first rays of the morning the master and his beloved
crossed a little moss-grown stone bridge. They left the stream behind them
and followed a sandy path.
'Listen to the silence,' said Margarita to tlhe master, the sand
rustling under her bare feet. ' Listen to the silence and enjoy it. Here is
the peace that you never knew in your lifetime. Look, there is your home for
eternity, which is your reward. I can already see a Venetian window and a
cllimbing vine which grows right up to the roof. It's your home, your home
for ever. In the evenings people will come to see you--people who interest
you, people who will never upset you. They will play to you and sing to you
and you will see how beautiful the room is by candlelight. You shall go to
sleep with your dirty old cap on, you shall go to sleep with a smile on your
lips. Sleep will give you strength and make you wise. And you can never send
me away-- I shall watch over your sleep.'
So said Margarita as she walked with the master towards their
everlasting home. Margarita's words seemed to him to flow like the
whispering stream behind them, and the master's memory, his accursed,
needling memory, began to fade. He had been freed, just as he had set free
the character he had created. His hero had now vanished irretrievably into
the abyss; on the night of Sunday, the day of the Resurrection, pardon had
been granted to the astrologer's son, fifth Procurator of Judaea, the cruel
Pontius Pilate.

Epilogue

But what happened in Moscow after sunset on that Saturday evening when
Woland and his followers left the capital and vanished from Sparrow Hills?
There is no need to mention the flood of incredible rumours which
buzzed round Moscow for long afterwards and even spread to the dimmest and
most distant reaches of the provinces. The rumours are, in any case, too
nauseating to repeat.
On a train journey to Theodosia, the honest narrator himself heard a
story of how in Moscow two thousand people had rushed literally naked out of
a theatre and were driven home in taxis.
The whispered words ' evil spirits ' could be heard in milk queues and
tram queues, in shops, flats and kitchens, in commuter trains and
long-distance expresses, on stations and halts, in weekend cottages and on
beaches.
Educated and cultured people, of course, took no part in all this
gossip about evil spirits descending on Moscow, and even laughed at those

who did, and tried to bring them to reason. But facts, as they say, are
facts and they could not be brushed aside without some explanation : someone
had come to Moscow. The few charred cinders which were all that was left of
Griboyedov, and much more besides, were eloquent proof of it.
Cultured people took the viewpoint of the police : a gang of
brilliantly skilful hypnotists and ventriloquists had been at work.
Immediate and energetic steps; to arrest them in Moscow and beyond were
naturally taken but unfortunately without the least result. The man calling
himself Woland and all his followers had vanished from Moscow never to
return there or anywhere else. He was ot course suspected of having escaped
abroad, but there was no sign of his being there either.
The investigation of his case lasted for a long time. It was certainly
one of the strangest on record. Besides four gutted buildings and hundreds
of people driven out of their minds, several people had been killed. At
least, two of them were definitely known to have been killed--Berlioz, and
that wretched guide to the sights of Moscow, ex-baron Maigel. His charred
bones were found in flat No. 50 after the fire had been put out. Violence
had been done and violence could not go unchecked.
But there were other victims who suffered as a result of Woland's stay
in Moscow and these were, sad to say, black cats.
A good hundred of these peaceful, devoted and useful animals were shot
or otherwise destroyed in various parts of the country. Thirty-odd cats,
some in a cruelly mutilated condition, were handed in to police stations in
various towns. In Armavir, for instance, one of these innocent creatures was
brought to the police station with its forelegs tied up.
The man had ambushed the cat just as the animal, wearing a very furtive
expression (how can cats help looking furtive? It is not because they are
depraved but because they are afraid of being hurt by creatures stronger
than they are, such as dogs and people. It is easy enough to hurt them but
it is not something that anyone need be proud of)--well, with this furtive
look the cat was just about to jump into some bushes.
Pouncing on the cat and pulling off his tie to pinion it, the man
snarled threateningly:
'Aha! So you've decided to come to Armavir, have you, you hypnotist?
No good pretending to be dumb! We know all about you!'
The man took the cat to the police station, dragging the wretched beast
along by its front legs, which were bound with a green tie so that it was
forced to walk on its hind legs.
'Stop playing the fool! ' shouted the man, surrounded by a crowd of
hooting boys, ' No good trying that trick--walk properly! '
The black cat could only suffer in silence. Deprived by nature of the
gift of speech, it had no means of justifying itself. The poor creature owed
its salvation largely to the police and to its mistress, an old widow. As
soon as the cat was delivered to the police station it was found that the
man smelled violently of spirits, which made him a dubious witness.
Meanwhile the old woman, hearing from her neighbour that her cat had been
abducted, ran to the police station and arrived in time. She gave the cat a
glowing reference, saying that she had had it for five years, since it was a
kitten in fact, would vouch for it as she would for herself, proved that it
had not been caught in any mischief and had never been to Moscow. It had
been born in Armavir, had grown up there and learned to catch mice there.
The cat was untied and returned to its owner, though having learned by
bitter experience the consequences of error and slander.
A few other people besides cats suffered minor inconvenience. Several
arrests were made. Among those arrested for a short time were--in Leningrad
one man called Wollman and one called Wolper, three Woldemars in Saratov,
Kiev and Kharkhov, a Wallach in Kazan, and for some obscure reason a chemist
in Penza by the name of Vetchinkevich. He was, it is true, a very tall man
with a dark complexion and black hair.
Apart from that nine Korovins, four Korovkins and two Karavaevs were
picked up in various places. One man was taken off the Sebastopol train in
handcuffs at Belgorod station for having tried to amuse his
fellow-passengers with card tricks.
One lunchtime at Yaroslavl a man walked into a restaurant carrying a

Primus, which he had just had repaired. As soon as they caught sight of him
the two cloak-room attendants abandoned their post and ran, followed by all
the customers and staff. Afterwards the cashier found that all her day's
takings had been stolen.
There was more, much more than anyone can remember. A shock-wave of
disquiet ran through the country.
It cannot be said too often that the police did an admirable job, given
the circumstances. Everything possible was done, not only to catch the
criminals but to provide explanations for what they had done. A reason was
found for everything and one must admit that the explanations were
undeniably sensible.
Spokesmen for the police and a number of experienced psychiatrists
established that the members of the gang, or perhaps one of them (suspicion
fell chiefly on Koroviev) were hypnotists of incredible skill, capable of
appearing to be in two or more places at once. Furthermore, they were
frequently able to persuade people that things or people were where they
weren't, or, vice-versa, they could remove objects or people from someone's
field of vision that were really there all the time.
In the light of this information everything was explicable, even the
extraordinary incident of the bullet-proof cat in flat No. 50. There had, of
course, been no cat on the chandelier, no one had fired back at the
detectives ; they had been firing at nothing while Koroviev, who had made
them believe that there was a cat going berserk on the chandelier, had
obviously been standing behind the detectives' backs and deploying his
colossal though criminally misused powers of suggestion. It was he, of
course, who had poured paraffin all over the room and set fire to it.
Stepa Likhodeyev, of course, had never been to Yalta at all (a trick
like that was beyond even Koroviev) and had sent no telegram from Yalta.
After fainting in the doorway of his bedroom, frightened by Koroviev's trick
of producing a cat eating a pickled mushroom on a fork, he had lain there
until Koroviev had rammed a sheepskin hat on his head and sent him to Moscow
airport, suggesting to the reception committee of detectives that Stepa was
really climbing out of an aeroplane that had flown from Sebastopol.
It is true that the Yalta police claimed to have seen Stepa and to have
sent telegrams about him to Moscow, but not a single copy of these telegrams
was to be found, which led to the sad but incontrovertible conclusion that
the band of hypnotists had the power of hypnotising people at vast distances
and then not only individuals but whole groups.
This being the case the criminals were obviously capable of sending
even the sanest people mad, so that trivia like packs of cards in a man's
pocket or vanishing ladies' dresses or a beret that turned into a cat and
suchlike were scarcely worth mentioning. Tricks like that could be done by
any mediocre hypnotist on any stage, including the old dodge of wrenching
off the compere's head. The talking cat was child's play, too. To show
people a talking cat one only had to know the first principles of
ventriloquy, and clearly Koroviev's abilities went far beyond basic
principles.
No, packs of cards and false letters in Nikanor Ivanovich's briefcase
were mere trifles. It was he, Koroviev, who had pushed Berlioz to certain
death under the tramcar. It was he who had driven the wretched poet Ivan
Bezdomny out of his mind, he who had given him nightmares about ancient
Jerusalem and parched, sun-baked Mount Golgotha with the three crucified
men. It was he and his gang who had spirited Margarita Niko-layevna and her
maid away from Moscow. The police, incidentally, paid special attention to
this aspect of the case, trying to discover whether these women had been
kidnapped by this gang of murderers and arsonists or whether they had
voluntarily run away with the criminals. Basing their findings on the
ridiculous and confused evidence provided by Nikolai Ivanovich, taking into
account the insane note that Margarita Nikolayevna had left for her husband
to say that she was becoming a witch, and considering the fact that Natasha
had vanished leaving all her movables at home, the investigators came to the
conclusion that both maid and mistress had been hypnotised like so many
others and then kidnapped by the gang. There was always, of course, the
likely consideration that the crooks had been attracted by two such pretty

women.
However, one thing baffled the police completely--what could have been
the gang's motive for abducting a mental patient, who called himself the
master, from a psychiatric clinic? This completely eluded them, as did the
abducted patient's real name. He was therefore filed away for ever under the
pseudonym of 'No. 118, Block i.'
Thus nearly everything was explained away and the investigation, as all
good things must, came to an end.
Years passed and people began to forget about Woland, Koroviev and the
rest. Many things changed in the lives of those who had suffered at the
hands of Woland and his associates, and however minor these changes may have
been they are still worth following up.
George Bengalsky, for example, after three months in hospital,
recovered and was sent home, but he had to give up his job at the Variety at
the busiest time of the season, when the public was storming the theatre for
tickets : the memory of the black magic and its revelations was too
unbearable. Bengalsky gave up the Variety because he realised that he could
not stand the agony of standing up in front of two thousand people every
evening, being inevitably recognised and endlessly subjected to jeering
questions about how he preferred to be--with or without his head? Apart from
that the compere had lost a lot of the cheerfulness which is essential in
his job. He developed a nasty, compulsive habit of falling into a depression
every spring at the full moon, of suddenly grabbing his neck, staring round
in terror and bursting into tears. These attacks did not last for long, but
nevertheless since he did have them he could hardly go on doing his old job,
and the compere retired and began living on his savings which, by his modest
reckoning, were enough to keep him for fifty years.
He left and never again saw Varenukha, who had acquired universal love
and popularity for his incredible charm and politeness, remarkable even for
a theatre manager. The free-ticket hounds, for instance, regarded him as
their patron saint. At whatever hour they rang the Variety, through the
receiver would always come his soft, sad: ' Hello,' and if the caller asked
for Varenukha to be brought to the telephone the same voice hastened to
reply : ' Speaking--at your service.' But how Ivan Savyelich had suffered
for his politeness!
You can no longer speak to Stepa Likhodeyev if you telephone the
Variety. Immediately after his week's stay in hospital, Stepa was
transferred to Rostov where he was made the manager of a large delicatessen
store. There are rumours that he never touches port these days, that he only
drinks vodka distilled from blackcurrants and is much healthier for it. They
say, too, that he is very silent these days and avoids women.
Stepan Bogdanovich's removal from the Variety did not bring Rimsky the
joy he had dreamed of for so many years. After hospital and a cure at
Kislovodsk, the treasurer, now an old, old man with a shaking head, tendered
his resignation. It was Rimsky's wife who brought his letter of resignation
to the theatre : Grigory Danilovich himself could not find the strength,
even in daytime, to revisit the building where he had seen the moonlit
windowpane rattling and the long arm reaching down to grasp the catch.
Having retired from the Variety, Rimsky got a job at the children's
marionette theatre on the far side of the Moscow River. Here he never even
had to deal with Arkady Apollonich Sempleyarov on the subject of acoustics,
because he in turn had been transferred to Bryansk and put in charge of a
mushroom-canning plant. Now Muscovites eat his salted chanterelles and his
pickled button-mushrooms and they are so delicious that everybody is
delighted with Arkady Apollonich's change of job. It is all so long ago now
that there is no harm in saying that Arkady Appollonich never had much
success at improving the acoustics of Moscow's theatres anyway, and the
situation is much the same today.
Apart from Arkady Apollonich, several other people have given up the
theatre for good, among them Nikanor Ivanovich Bosoi, even though his only
link with the theatre was a fondness for free tickets. Nowadays Nikanor
Ivanovich not only refuses to accept free tickets : he wouldn't set foot
inside a theatre if you paid him and he even turns pale if the subject crops
up in conversation. More than the theatre he now loathes both Pushkin and

that gifted artiste, Savva Potapovich Kurolesov;
in fact he detests that actor to such a degree that last year, catching
sight of a black-bordered announcement in the newspaper that Sawa Potapovicb
had been struck down in the prime of life by a heart attack, Nikanor
Ivanovich turned such a violent shade of purple that he almost joined Savva
Potapovich, and he roared:
'Serve him right! '
What is more, the actor's death stirred so many painful memories for
Nikanor Ivanovich that he went out and, with the full moon for company, got
blind drunk. With every glass that he drank the row of hated figures
lengthened in front of him-- there stood Sergei Gerardovich Dunchill, there
stood the beautiful Ida Herkulanovna, there stood the red-bearded man and
his herd of fearsome geese.
And what happened to them? Nothing. Nothing could ever happen to them
because they never existed, just as the compere, the theatre itself, the
miserly old aunt hoarding currency in her cellar and the rude cooks never
existed either. Nikanor Ivanovich had dreamed it all under the evil
influence of the beastly Koroviev. The only real person in his dream was
Sawa Potapovich the actor, who got involved merely because Ivanor Ivanovich
had so often heard him on the radio. Unlike all the others, he was real.
So perhaps Aloysius Mogarych did not exist either? Far from it.
Aloysius Mogarych is still with us, in the very job that Rimsky gave
up--treasurer of the Variety Theatre.
About twenty-four hours after his call on Woland, Aloysius had regained
consciousness in a train somewhere near Vyatka. Finding that he had
absentmindedly left Moscow without his trousers but had somehow brought his
landlord's rent-book with him, Aloysius had given the conductor a colossal
tip, borrowed a pair of filthy old trousers from him and turned back to
Moscow from Vyatka. But he failed to find his landlord's house. The ancient
pile had been burnt to the ground. Aloysius, however, was extremely
ingenious. Within a fortnight he had moved into an excellent room in Bryusov
Street and a few months later he was installed in Rimsky's office. Just as
Rimsky had suffered under Stepa, Varenukha's life was now made a misery by
Aloysius. Ivan Savyelich's one and only wish is for Aloysius to be removed
as far away from the Variety as possible because, as Varenukha sometimes
whispers among his close friends, ' he has never met such a swine in his
life as that Aloysius and he wouldn't be surprised at anything Aloysius
might do '.
The house manager is perhaps biased. Aloysius is not known to have done
anything suspicious--indeed he does not appear to have done anything at all,
except of course to appoint another barman in place of Sokov. Andrei Fokich
died of cancer of the liver nine months after Woland's visit to Moscow. . .
.
More years passed and the events described in this truthful account
have faded from most people's memories--with a few exceptions.
Every year, at the approach of the vernal full moon, a man of about
thirty or a little more can be seen walking towards the lime trees of
Patriarch's Ponds. A reddish-haired, green-eyed, modestly dressed man. He is
Professor Ivan Nikolayich Poniryov of the Institute of History and
Philosophy.
When he reaches the lime trees he always sits down on the same bench on
which he sat that evening when Berlioz, now long forgotten by everybody, saw
the moon shatter to fragments for the last time in his life. Now that moon,
whole and in one piece, white in the early evening and later golden with its
outline of a dragon-horse, floats over the erstwhile poet Ivan Nikolayich
while seeming to stand still.
Ivan Nikolayich now knows and understands everything. He knows that as
a young man he fell victim to some crooked hypnotists, went to hospital and
was cured. But he knows that there is still something that is beyond his
control. He cannot control what happens at the springtime full moon. As soon
as it draws near, as soon as that heavenly body begins to reach that
fullness it once had when it hung in the sky high above the two
seven-branched candlesticks, Ivan Nikolayich grows uneasy and irritable,
loses his appetite, cannot sleep and waits for the moon to wax. When full

moon comes nothing can keep Ivan Nikolayich at home. Towards evening he
leaves home and goes to Patriarch's Ponds.
As he sits on the bench Ivan Nikolayich openly talks to himself,
smokes, peers at the moon or at the familiar turnstile.
Ivan Nikolayich spends an hour or two there, then gets up and walks,
always following the same route, across Spiridonovka Street with unseeing
eyes towards the side-streets near the Arbat.
He passes an oil-shop, turns by a crooked old gas lamp and creeps up to
some railings through which he can see a garden that is splendid, though not
yet in flower, and in it--lit on one side by moonlight, dark on the other,
with an attic that has a triple-casement window--a house in the Gothic
style.
The professor never knows what draws him to those railings or who lives
in that house, but he knows that it is useless to fight his instinct at full
moon. He knows, too, that in the garden beyond the railings he will
inevitably see the same thing every time.
He sees a stout, elderly man sitting on a bench, a man with a beard, a
pince-nez and very, very slightly piggish features. Ivan Nikolayich always
finds that tenant of the Gothic house in the same dreamy attitude, his gaze
turned towards the moon. Ivan Nikolayich knows that having stared at the
moon the seated man will turn and look hard at the attic windows, as though
expecting them to be flung open and something unusual to appear on the
windowsill.
The rest, too, Ivan Nikolayich knows by heart. At this point he has to
duck down behind the railings, because the man on the bench begins to twist
his head anxiously, his wandering eyes seeking something in the air. He
smiles in triumph, then suddenly clasps his hands in delicious agony and
mutters quite distinctly:
'Venus! Venus! Oh, what a fool I was . . .!'
'Oh God,' Ivan Nikolayich starts to whisper as he hides behind the
railings with his burning gaze fixed on the mysterious stranger. ' Another
victim of the moon . . . Another one like me . . .'
And the man goes on talking :
'Oh, what a fool I was! Why, why didn't I fly away with her? What was
I afraid of, stupid old ass that I am? I had to ask for that document! . . .
Well, you must just put up with it, you old cretin!' So it goes on until a
window opens on the dark side of the house, something white appears in it
and an unpleasant female voice rings out:
'Where are you, Nikolai Ivanovich? What the hell are you doing out
there? Do you want to catch malaria? Come and drink your tea! '
At this the man blinks and says in a lying voice :
'I'm just having a breath of fresh air, my dear! The air out here is
so nice! '
Then he gets up from his bench, furtively shakes his fist at the window
which has just closed and stumps indoors.
'He's lying, he's lying! Oh God, how he's lying! ' mumbles Ivan
Nikolayich as he walks from the railings. ' He doesn't come down to the
garden for the fresh air--he sees something in that springtime sky,
something high above the garden! What wouldn't I give to find out his
secret, to know who the Venus is that he lost and now tries vainly to catch
by waving his arms in the air.'
The professor returns home a sick man. His wife pretends not to notice
it and hurries him into bed, but she stays up and sits by the lamp with a
book, watching the sleeping man with a bitter look. She knows that at dawn
Ivan Nikolayich will wake up with an agonised cry, will start to weep and
rave. That is why she keeps in front of her on the tablecloth a hypodermic
syringe ready in a dish of spirit and an ampoule of liquid the colour of
strong tea.
Later the poor woman is free to go to sleep without misgiving. After
his injection Ivan Nikolayich will sleep until morning with a calm
expression and he will dream, unknown to her, dreams that are sublimely
happy.
It is always the same thing that wakens the scholar and wrings that
pitiful cry from him. He sees a strange, noseless executioner who, jumping

up and uttering a grunt as he does so, pierces the heart of the maddened
Hestas, lashed to a gibbet. But what makes the dream so horrible is not so
much the executioner as the lurid, unnatural light that comes from a cloud,
seething and drenching the earth, of the kind that only accompanies natural
disasters.
After his injection the sleeper's vision changes. From the bed to the
moon stretches a broad path of moonlight and up it is climbing a man in a
white cloak with a blood-red lining. Beside him walks a young man in a torn
chiton and with a disfigured face. The two are talking heatedly, arguing,
trying to agree about something.
'Ye gods! ' says the man in the cloak, turning his proud face to his
companion. ' What a disgusting method of execution! But please, tell
me,'--here the pride in his face turns to supplication--' it did not take
place, did it? I beg you--tell me that it never took place? '
'No, of course it never took place,' answers his companion in a husky
voice. ' It was merely your imagination.'
'Can you swear to that? ' begged the man in the cloak.
'I swear it! ' answers his companion, his eyes smiling.
'That is all I need to know! ' gasps the man in the cloak as he
strides on towards the moon, beckoning his companion on. Behind them walks a
magnificently calm, gigantic dog with pointed ears.
Then the moonbeam begins to shake, a river of moonlight floods out of
it and pours in all directions. From the flood materialises a woman of
incomparable beauty and leads towards Ivan a man with a stubble-grown face,
gazing fearfully round him. Ivan Nikolayich recognises him at once. It is
No. 118, his nocturnal visitor. In his dream Ivan stretches out his arms
towards him and asks greedily :
'So was that how it ended? '
'That is how it ended, disciple,' replies No. 118 as the woman
approaches Ivan and says :
'Of course. It has ended ; and everything has an end . . . I'll kiss
you on the forehead and everything will be as it should be . . .'
She leans over Ivan and kisses him on the forehead and Ivan strains
towards her to look into her eyes, but she draws back, draws back and walks
away towards the moon with her companion. . . .
Then the moon goes mad, deluges Ivan with streams of light, sprays
light everywhere, a moonlight flood invades the room, the light sways,
rises, drowns the bed. It is then that Ivan sleeps with a look of happiness
on his face.
In the morning he wakes silent, but quite calm and well. His bruised
memory has subsided again and until the next full moon no one will trouble
the professor--neither the noseless man who killed Hestas nor the cruel
Procurator of Judaea, fifth in that office, the knight Pontius Pilate.


When we began assembling this anthology, we were dogged by the thought that Russian noir is less about the Moscow of gleaming Bentley interiors and rhinestones on long-legged blondes than it is about St. Petersburg, the empire’s former capital, whose noir atmosphere was so accurately reconstructed by Dostoevsky and Gogol. But the deeper we and the anthology’s authors delved into Moscow’s soul-chilling debris, the more vividly it arose before us in all its bleak and mystical despair. Despite its stunning outward luster, Moscow is above all a city of broken dreams and corrupted utopias, and all manner of scum oozes through the gap between fantasy and reality.

The city comprises fragments of “utterly incommensurate milieus,” notes Grigory Revzin, one of Moscow’s leading journalists, in a recent column. The word “incommensurability” truly captures the feeling you get from Moscow. The complete lack of style, the vast expanses punctuated by buildings between which lie four-century chasms—a wooden house up against a construction of steel—and all of it the result of protracted (more than 850-year) formation. Just a small settlement on the huge map of Russia in 1147, Moscow has traveled a hard path to become the monster it is now. Periods of unprecedented prosperity have alternated with years of complete oblivion.

The center of a sprawling state for nearly its entire history, Moscow has attracted diverse communities, who have come to the city in search of better lives—to work, mainly, but also to beg, to glean scraps from the tables of hard-nosed merchants, to steal and rob. The concentration of capital allowed people to tear down and rebuild ad infinitum; new structures were erected literally on the foundations of the old. Before the 1917 Revolution, buildings demolished and resurrected many times over created a favorable environment for all manner of criminal and quasi-criminal elements. After the Revolution, the ideology did not simply encourage destruction but demanded it. The Bolshevik anthem has long defined the public mentality: “We will raze this world of violence to its foundations, and then/We will build our new world: he who was nothing will become everything!”

Back to the notion of corrupted utopias: much was destroyed, but the new world remained an illusion. Those who had nothing settled in communal apartments. After people were evicted from their private homes and comfortable apartments, dozens of families settled in these spaces, whereupon a new Soviet collective existence was created. (Professor Preobrazhensky, the hero of Mikhail Bulgakov’s Heart of a Dog, happily avoided this “consolidation.” In the novel, set in post-revolutionary Moscow, the professor transplants a human pituitary gland into a dog in hopes of transforming the animal into a person. The half-man who results from this experiment immediately joins up with the Reds. The test is a failure. In Bulgakov’s opinion, he who was “nothing” could not become “everything.”) That form of survival existed in Moscow until very recently, and from the average westerner’s standpoint, nothing more oppressive could ever be devised: an existence lived publicly, in all its petty details, like in prison or a hospital.

The story of the Cathedral of Christ the Savior is a fairly graphic symbol of how Moscow was “built.” The church was constructed in the late nineteenth century on the site of a convent, which was dismantled and then blown up in 1931, on Stalin’s order, for the construction of the Palace of Soviets. The Palace of Soviets was never built (whether for technical or ideological reasons is not clear), and in its place the huge open-air Moskva Pool was dug out by 1960; it existed until the 1990s, when on the same site they began resurrecting the Cathedral of Christ the Savior, symbolizing “new Russia.”

The more you consider the history of Moscow, the more it looks like a transformer that keeps changing its face, as if at the wave of a magic wand. Take Chistye Prudy—Pure Ponds (the setting for Vladimir Tuchkov’s story in this volume)—which is now at the center of Moscow but in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was in the outskirts and was called “Foul” or “Dirty” Ponds. The tax on bringing livestock into Moscow was much higher than the tax on importing meat, so animals were killed just outside the city, and the innards were tossed into those ponds. One can only imagine what the place was like until it finally occurred to some prince to clean out this source of stench, and voilà! Henceforth the ponds were “clean.”

There are a great many such stories. Moscow changes rapidly as it attempts to overcome its dirt, poverty, despair, desolation, and evil; nonetheless, it so often ends up right back where it started.

A noir literary tradition does not yet really exist in Russia in general or Moscow in particular. Why? Possibly due to the censorship of czarist Russia, to say nothing of the Soviet era. In 1887, Vladimir Gilyarovsky, a writer, journalist, and great stylist of Moscow life, prepared an anthology of short sketches about Moscow’s gloomiest locales and their inhabitants, The Stories of the Slums. However, the book was not to see the light of day. The censorship committee banned the book and its pages were burned. As an aide to the main administration chief wrote in response to Gilyarovsky’s request to allow the book to go to press, “Nothing will come of your troubles … This is sheer gloom without a single glimmer, the slightest justification, nothing but a condemnation of the existing order. Such truth cannot be written.” There was no further writing “without a glimmer or justification” for another hundred years or so, and for a long time even Ludmilla Petrushevskaya, a Russian State Prize laureate and living classic (one of whose artistic directions could well be classified as noir), had to write her plays and stories about the shady aspects of life without hope of publication.

Any discussion of Moscow’s noir sources demands mention of a novel by the brothers Arkadi and Georgi Vainer, Era of Mercy, about the postwar (1945) struggle between the police and the “breeding dregs.” Experienced operative Gleb Zheglov and frontline soldier Vladimir Sharapov, who is, unfortunately, a novice at investigations, face the sinister “Black Cat.” The book was adapted into a famous television miniseries, The Meeting Place Cannot Be Changed, which many Muscovites know by heart.

The atmosphere closest to noir is found in works devoted to the Stalinist era, such as Vasily Aksyonov’s Moscow Saga and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s First Circle: the patrol wagons that spirit “enemies of the people” off into the night, never to return home, for they will be shot without trial or investigation; the torture chambers; the betrayals; the fear; the suicides; and the “House on the Embankment” as an icon of Stalinist noir. Inevitably, our anthology is haunted by this Stalinist ghost as well, in the stories of Sergei Kuznetsov and Dmitry Kosyrev (a.k.a. Master Chen).

True noir is not only contained within Moscow’s central districts, replete with the atmosphere of multiple destructions and even more ghosts (Pure Ponds and Zamoskvorechye, the settings for the stories by Vladimir Tuchkov and Gleb Shulpyakov), but also the residential neighborhoods where, despite the dream of broad streets, bright-colored buildings, and ample green space, poverty still reigns and the typical apartments with their cheerless electric light and thin walls never let their inhabitants forget for a minute that there is no exit. This is Perovo in Maxim Maximov’s story, and Andrei Khusnutdinov’s Babushinskaya, where Paul Khlebnikov, editor in chief of the Russian Forbes, met his death. In the forested areas at the city’s edge maniacs are at work, but in the largest of them, Elk Island National Park, there is a piece of land one kilometer square that, due to a strange combination of circumstances, is not protected by a single police unit. This is where thugs go to settle scores, this is where they bring their dead bodies, and this is where the dramatic events in Alexander Anuchkin’s story “Field of a Thousand Corpses” unfold. Naturally, noir is train stations too, where people congregate after they have lost hope, where it’s easy to be completely anonymous and get lost in the crowd; train stations play leading roles in the stories by Anna Starobinets and Alexei Evdokimov. Actually, almost any place in Moscow longs to be the setting for a story of crime and violence.

This anthology is an attempt to turn the tourist Moscow of gingerbread and woodcuts, of glitz and big money, inside out; an attempt to reveal its fetid womb and make sense of the desolation that still reigns.


I’m waiting for mercy. It should be here any minute now. There it is, turning the corner. Soon it will stop and open up its doors to me and others like me. Just a few more minutes and we’ll be warm.

Right now it’s cold, though. It’s real cold. Especially for me. At least they get to lie on the sewage grates, or sit nearby on the bare asphalt, their backs up against the gray panels of the train station. They get the choice spots. Hot steam rises up from under the ground, saturating their stinking rags and bodies, their hair and their skin. The steam is so hot that it even melts the icicles hanging down from the roof of the building. Droplets run down the icicles like pus. It’s warm there, beneath the overhang.

On the other hand, I don’t envy them. When they get up they’re going to feel ten times worse, with their clothes soaking wet and all—it’s minus thirty degrees. True, they’ll be getting right onto the bus, but who wants to be soaking wet in a bus?

A shapless old hag in sagging purple tights is asleep, breathing gently. The rest are awake. They watch with no expression as the bus approaches. The cripple shuffled off, the hem of his soft leather overcoat trailing behind him on the frozen ground, his shiny black dress shoes worth a thousand dollars each. Unbelievable, he hadn’t even wanted them! Foxy Lee had it all figured out. “At the station you can just trade with one of them,” she’d said, but she hadn’t considered that these retards might turn down such a good deal, clutching their rags with iron grips.

I had to force the trade on him. I can be pretty convincing sometimes, particularly when I’m right.

By the way, never pick a fight with a bum at Kursk station. It’s like trying to battle with a giant rotten apple, or a bag of garbage.

True, they were too small for him, the shoes. But that’s no big deal, he can break them in. Or sell them. The rest of the duds were too big for him. But that’s how they wear them around here.

None of his friends went after him. No one tried to stop me while I was slugging him either. The expressions on their swollen steamy faces were hard for me to make out, even under the streetlight, but I think they were looking kind of hostile.

So just in case, I keep to the edge of the group. I’m safer here, near the entrance gates and the cops. Because, first of all, they’re afraid of the cops. Second, they’re too lazy—no, lazy’s not the right word, they’re too comatose to cover the fifty-meter distance to where I’m standing.

Of course, the cops tried to shoo me away. There were two of them. I gave them each a hundred bucks (I didn’t have any smaller bills on me). They stared at me, and then at the bills, with their blank fish eyes, and finally they laid off. Understandable, I guess. It’s not every day you see a piss-covered bum around Kursk station with a wad of greenbacks in his pocket. A minute later one of them came back. He sniffed back his snot, his nose violet from the frost, and stared hungrily at the bridge of my nose.

“Got any ID?”

I gave him another hundred. Breathing hard, he examined it under the yellow light of the streetlamp, then stuffed it inside his jacket. He shifted his weight from foot to foot. His gaze slid like sewage water down my unshaven face, broken nose, lip soaked in blood, and my dirty rags covered in brownish-yellow stains, before slithering back up to my face, where it paused for a moment on my misshapen gray hat with earflaps. Something caught his attention there, either the cut of the hat or the locks of hair that were left uncovered, too shiny and clean for the likes of me. I pulled my hat down over my forehead to reassure him. He had already forgotten about it, and his eyes shifted over me mechanically, until he focused on the bridge of my nose again.

“Where’d you steal the money?”

Now that was going too far.

“I earned it,” I told him. But my voice came out sounding choked and hoarse, like a crow cawing.

“I’m taking you down,” the cop said colorlessly, and suddenly—I swear—his teeth started chattering, maybe from the cold or, most likely, from hunger, the greedy bastard.

I gave him another hundred bucks, promising myself that this was the last time. I really didn’t want any problems with law-enforcement officers, but arrogance has its limits, even from a cop. And four hundred is definitely the limit. If he tried to get any more out of me, I’d kill him.

Again, he studied my contribution, then hid it away. He sniffed. Coughed uncertainly.

“Any more questions, officer?” I croaked, pulling the mitten off my frozen hand so that it would be easier to shoot if he said yes, and cursing myself for the servile “officer,” which had rolled off my lips like a token rolling out of the broken turnstile at the john in Kursk station.

By the way, don’t ever take a piss at Kursk. Unless, of course, you like pissing into a reeking hole in the cold in front of other people for fifteen rubles.

A passenger train pulled into the station with a shriek and a groan. The cop squinted lazily at the train and then stole a glance at my bare fingers—too clean, too smooth, and my nails were too manicured. He was thinking hard about something, which was obviously not easy for him. He wrinkled his low forehead, and his eyebrows twitched like cockroaches. Finally the twitching stopped.

“Who are you?” he asked, and looked me in the eye for the first time, intently and with some degree of intelligence. He was obviously on the brink of some kind of realization.

I felt the icy handle of the gun in my pocket. To be honest, I don’t like guns. I’m a bad shot, anyway. On the other hand, even a fool can shoot. Right. First you just cock it back …

Foxy Lee hadn’t wanted to give me the gun. That put me on my guard. She kept pushing me gently toward the door, shaking her red mane of hair and mumbling, “You won’t be needing that. Come on! You don’t need it.” Then she caught my stare and her face crumpled up like she was hurt. “You don’t believe me, do you? Just like before!”

I thought she was going to start bawling. But she didn’t. She handed me the gun, barrel first, and frowned. That’s not how you do it. Handgrip first, I said to myself automatically, and took the gun from her, feeling ashamed again.

“Just don’t do anything stupid,” said Foxy. “If anything happens, one of my guys will be at the station. He’ll help you.”

Suddenly I felt uncomfortable.

“One of your guys? What does that mean?”

“Ours,” Foxy corrected herself playfully. “Our guy. A friend.” She put her arms around my neck. Her hands were cool and her fingertips were slightly moist.

“I’ll get along fine without your friends.” I wanted to pull away, but she wouldn’t let me.

“Don’t be jealous,” Foxy whispered into my ear. “It was a long time ago.”

That made me even more mad. A long time ago, what the hell is that supposed to mean? When Stary picked you up at the train station you were seventeen, a filthy, skinny little redhead. You’re twenty-one now. Only twenty-one, girl! So what the hell does that mean—a long time ago?

She stroked my cheek. Her fingers smelled sweetly of flower-scented hand cream and blood.

“I’ll be with you,” said Foxy. “If that’s what you want.”

I nodded and said I did. I was angry and I wanted her, and I kissed her red hair, and her thick blond eyelashes, her little palms and those fingers—cold, moist fingers that she hadn’t managed to wash very well. I kissed them and inhaled their scent, animal-like and childish at the same time.



“Listen to me, buddy!” the cop said, his voice rising. “Who the fuck are you?”

“… two … three …” I whispered.

“What?!”

I decided to count to seven, my favorite number, and then shoot.

“… four …”

People started filing out of the train that had just pulled in, making a wide semicircle around the spot where I stood with the cop. Some character in a leather jacket with a shaved head shuffled by, looking furtively at us. Then he stopped and stared.

“Keep moving!” the cop barked at him.

The guy walked straight toward us.

“Let me see your ID,” the cop demanded, taken aback.

“Cn I’ve a wrd ith you, offcr?” mumbled the guy in leather, completely unfazed but slurring every sound. He gestured to the cop amiably.

The cop turned to me and then to the leather guy—and froze.

“C’mon, c’mon,” the leather guy said, still slurring his words, but this time in a more commanding tone. “Git ovr here, offcr.”

Suddenly, the eyes of the officer took on the expression of an animal, a mix of sharp sadness and surprise, and he silently strode over to the leather guy the way a dog goes to its trainer when it has mixed up its commands.

The fellow in leather whispered a few brief words into the cop’s ear. The cop looked at me from under his brow, nodded dejectedly, and sauntered off into the darkness.

“Offcr!” the leather guy called after him quietly.

“Aren’t you frgetting smethin?”

The cop’s back slumped.

“Didn ya take smthin tht didn blong to ya?”

The back didn’t so much as stir.

“Git outta here,” the guy in leather said, softening, and the cop rushed off, his boots crunching on the frozen crust of snow.

“Watch it, buddy!” The guy in leather advised me good-naturedly, then winked and moved away.

“Thanks,” I replied politely, but he didn’t turn around.

Buddy. Uh-huh, right.

* * *

And so I’m waiting for mercy. It should be here soon.

Here it is now. It just came around the corner, stopped next to the train station, and opened its doors to me.

Mercy, as everyone knows, is blurry and abstract. It can assume many different forms: from a coin at the bottom of your pocket to a blank check, from a plastic doggie bag to a benefit concert, from a kiss to artificial respiration, from a Validol pill to a shot in the head, from the ability to love to the ability to kill.

The mercy granted me is concrete. It takes the form of a dirty white bus. It is given to me for one night—this cold, dark, terrible, final, happy, damned night—and I will accept it without hesitation.

On this cold night, when you can freeze to death in an hour.

On this dark night, when you can disappear without a trace in a minute.

On this terrible night, when they’re looking for me high and low: in apartments and bars, in subways and airports, at hotels and movie theaters, in nightclubs and casinos, on the streets and in stairwells.

On this final night they are looking for me so they can kill me.

On this happy night, when they won’t find me because no one will think to look for me here, on the Mercy Bus that saves the homeless from hunger and cold.

Mercy is what I need on this damned night.

That is why I fall before the open doors of the bus. I cough, I snort, and I wheeze. I crawl on all fours as though I don’t have the strength to stand up, and I stretch my trembling hands toward them—toward three people in blue jackets, with red crosses on their sleeves and the word Mercy on their backs, and gauze masks pulled tight over their faces. I babble, my tongue tripping on the sounds.

I crawl at their feet, touching their shoes and begging: “… Help … save me …” I sniff, then grovel: “Save me …”

Foxy taught me to do that. “There aren’t many seats on the bus,” she said. “They only take the ones who are in really bad shape. They drive you around the city all night, keep you warm, feed you, and in the morning bring you back.”

“Only the ones who are in really bad shape.”

“Only the ones who are completely down-and-out.”

“Only the ones who will die without them.”

Well, at least I wasn’t lying when I groveled. Without them, I really would die. Stary’s men would kill me. They’d hunt me down and kill me like a witless animal.

Besides, the cops would be after me soon too.

“I’m fucked, man …”

And the merciful guys in masks pick me up by the arms and haul me into the bus. Now I am safe. I will be safe all night long, until morning. In the morning I’ll get on the 7:01 train.

The men in masks seat the swollen, dirty, frozen, decomposing half-people. The Mercy Bus drives off.

Foxy Lee, my girl, my little train-station slut, my sweet guardian angel, found me a safe lair to hide in. Safe and stinking.

God almighty, what a stench! I’d give every greenback in my possession for a mask—the kind those brothers of mercy have. Gimme a mask, man, gimme a mask!

The windows of the bus are draped in thin threads of frost, adorned in snowy cobwebs, covered from the inside with a frozen glaze. That thin glaze is all that separates the stinking, sticky warmth of our bus from the piercing cleanliness of the city. Out there it is easy and painful to breathe. With each breath, your nostrils seem to stick together. Out there my killers are looking for me, swearing and cursing, inhaling and exhaling the frozen air.

Here, inside, trying not to breathe through my nose, I scrape out an ugly peephole in the perfect pattern of the frosted window, and I look out.

We crawl along past the Atrium, and the engine roars and trembles in helpless convulsions. The mall glows with neon. Half-naked mannequins pose in shop windows, and others just like them, only dressed up in fur coats and winter jackets, surge through the glass doors to the twenty-four-hour cash registers. In the glare of headlights, streetlamps, and billboards, in a red snowstorm, the people, their faces rust-colored, look like frolicking devils. Their cars, parked seven rows deep, form the seven circles of hell—a honking Moscow hell, where traffic jams happen even at midnight.



Still, this place seemed by far the best location for the Merciful Monsters Charity Ball. The idea for the ChaBa (Charity Ball) belonged to me and me alone, though I had planned to rent a cushy theater like the MKhAT, or a concert hall, or at the very least a fancy nightclub.

Stary was the one who wanted to have the Charity Ball in the Atrium. Stary and Foxy Lee spent a lot of time in the Atrium. Foxy liked buying perfume, lotion, high heels, clothes, lingerie, bedding, shampoo, cookies, and sauces in nearly industrial quantities. Stary, I can’t deny it, waited for her patiently, no matter how long it took. He even made excuses to his bleary-eyed bodyguards: “She had a tough frickin’ childhood, so frickin’ cool it! And cover your frickin’ traps when you yawn, goddamnit!” While Foxy was shopping, he liked to kill time in a restaurant, eating sushi and washing it down with tequila, before going to a movie. He thought of himself as a film buff. From time to time, along with his lovers and security guards, Stary would take one of his subordinates to the Atrium. The invitation was the boss’s seal of approval and guaranteed promotion, prosperity, and impunity to the recipient for some time to come.

This period usually lasted no more than two months. When his shelf life ran out, the favorite was thrown onto the garbage heap (that is to say, demoted to personal chauffeur of the second secretary’s assistant, or fired, or wiped off the face of the earth, depending on Stary’s mood).

From the beginning of November, I accompanied Foxy and Stary to the Atrium. Toward the end of December I was still the favorite, although I sensed that my time was running out. Late that month, Stary called me to the Atrium, sent Foxy off shopping, knocked back a double shot of tequila, and announced: “A friend of mine used to light a candle at the Cathedral of Christ the Savior if things were going good for him. I always thought that a candle wasn’t enough. But I kept quiet because he was doing all right and I wasn’t. Now my friend’s in prison. It’ll be a long, long time before he gets out. And now things are going good for me.”

Stary was doing all right. He had found a cozy place for himself on the Pipeline. His perch was nonetheless precarious enough that he was ready to bail out any minute (the Pipeline didn’t quite belong to him yet, at least not completely). He didn’t experience any discomfort in his backside, however (because the Pipeline did not entirely belong to someone else). He sat placidly and listened to the faint gurgle of the black blood of Russia as it flowed abroad.

“I’m swimming in oil! She’s black and she’s mine!” Stary said this with carnivorous relish, as though he was talking about a naked and capricious African princess who gave herself to him at night with shrieks, tears, and moans. It tormented and affronted me in the most idiotic, awkward, and ridiculous way. When the boss used this expression, which he did very often, an ill-fated black princess appeared before my eyes: moist, nimble, shapely, and bearing a certain resemblance to Halle Berry. A second later, her image was replaced by that of a red-haired girl. The one Stary really did fuck. Foxy. Does Foxy moan when she comes? Does she close her whitish fox eyes, or do they go large and glassy, like those of a stuffed animal? These questions preoccupied me a great deal.

“Are you listening to me?”

“Yes, boss, of course!”

What does she smell like? What does she taste like?

“So, anyway, I’m doing pretty good. And I’m a superstitious man, so I think I owe something to the Big Guy. But I’m not going to light up any candles. Because candles won’t cut it. I think I should do something for charity.”

What about the shape of her nipples? What color are they? And what about her freckles? Freckles sprinkled her pale skin like gold dust. Does she have them all over?

“You seem like a smart guy. So I want you to think up some kind of charity event. A real tearjerker. Something to make everyone bawl. So that I seem like a father to everyone, you know what I mean? So they’ll think of me afterward when the time comes. You know, elect me. You get it. So, think something up. You got imagination.”

That’s when I created the ChaBa.

It was the end of December, my time was almost up, Stary was eating sushi, and Foxy was throwing money to the wind. I thought up the idea for ChaBa in a whirlwind of inspiration and despair. I thought of ChaBa because I thought that a little money wouldn’t hurt me, in the end.

“Merciful Monsters Charity Ball,” I announced proudly.

“What’s that?” said Stary, stabbing a morsel of sushi with one of his chopsticks.

“A costume ball and masquerade. Real fancy. Real stylish. We’ll have Ksyusha Sobchak, Zemfira, Renata Litvinova, Zverev, I don’t know who else, maybe Fedya Bondarchuk, some red-carpet types, Rublyevka wives, a couple oligarchs, some ministers, I dunno.”

“And?”

“And everybody dresses up like monsters. They eat, drink, dance, get high, fuck, and the whole thing will be on TV.”

“What’s the point?”

“There’ll be invitations, which the merciful monsters will get only after making a donation to some charity organization like, I dunno, Destitute Russia. Yeah, Destitute Russia. All profits go to the poor and homeless.”

“Homeless …” Stary murmured absently.

It was a smart move on my part. Stary always had a soft spot for the poor and the homeless. That is to say, always since the day he hired an underage redheaded whore for five bucks and took her from Kursk station to his place, a humble three-story mansion overlooking the Yauza River. He fucked her, fed her, kept her warm, and decided to keep her for good, like a lost cat. From that day, Stary imagined himself to be the protector of the poor, for they shall inherit the kingdom of heaven.

He often got on my nerves, telling me about their first night together. How she started weeping when he told her she could stay …

“Monsters, huh? I like it! There was a movie called Monster’s Ball. Yeah, a movie … with, you know, what’s-her-name in it.”

… And how she couldn’t calm down, and kept on sobbing like a baby so that she couldn’t even say her name. (Carefully and kindly, Stary first threw away the used condom, then offered the girl shelter, and then decided to introduce himself.)

“What’s her name, the black one …”

“Halle Berry.”

“That’s right, Halle Berry.”

… And how she told him through her tears, “M-m-my name is L—L—L—”

“Lee? You must be Foxy Lee with your red hair,” Stary suggested, laughing, and when she stopped crying she said, “Foxy, I like that. I’m Lisa, actually.”

“Monsters Ball, I like the sound of that. Monsters help the homeless! You’ve got some smarts, all right! Monsters. I’ll get ’em all over here to the Atrium.”

“But—”

“I’ll rent the Atrium for the night, no problem.”

… And how they laughed afterward, and how “Lisa” didn’t really stick, but that sweet Lee did. That Lee really did stick. Foxy Lee, it almost sounds Chinese.

Foxy Lee, my red-haired little girl.

She said that she liked me from the very beginning. I could never figure out whether she really liked me, or whether I just didn’t disgust her. Or maybe she didn’t really care one way or the other. On the whole, Foxy acted like a typical female of the species: she didn’t get uppity, and she deferred to the strongest male, never forgetting that there were other males around grazing, and that his status as “strongest” was always temporary.

When Stary wasn’t looking she never missed a chance to make eyes at me. Although, no, come to think of it, I’m exaggerating. She didn’t really make eyes at me. She just looked me right in the eye, staring; but for too long, and her gaze was too moist. The blood from my head rushed to the pit of my stomach and the skin on my back would be covered in goose-bumps. Then I would recall (genetic memory should never be underestimated) how the backs of my ancestors were covered in hair, and that their hair was said to stand on end at the sight of such females.

But Stary was the strongest, the alpha male; and she was afraid of him.

Stary owned millions, and sometimes killed people (although not by his own hand, of course). Stary had gotten the nickname back in kindergarden, because his last name was Starkovsky. He was five years older than me. He was only forty when he died.

And today was the day he died.



Our bus is driving from one train station to the next. By the end of the night it will have been to each one in the city. At each stop the men in masks drag in more half-dead bums, until the bus is totally full, until the smell becomes completely unbearable, until we come full circle and end up back at Kursk. This is a mission of mercy. This is the route of suffering.

At Three Stations Square there was a whole line of frozen beggars. They all wanted to get a place on the bus, but the merciful took only those who couldn’t stand up. Only those who were lying in the dirty snow outside the line.

That seems pretty dumb to me. Why pick up only the weakest? If you’re going to try to rescue someone, it makes more sense to save the ones who can stand up. They’re stronger. They have a better chance of survival.

Hey, guys! Save the strongest! You can’t save the fallen ones anyway.

* * *

She kissed me for the first time at the Merciful Monsters Charity Ball.

She wasn’t wearing a costume. (Stary didn’t want his woman looking grotesque.) She was simply wrapped in expensive furs, her red hair down and a fox mask over her face. A simple one like the kind for kids. She was the most beautiful of all—not because everyone else came wearing fangs and bloody or half-decomposed faces, but just objectively. Because she was.

But I had other things on my mind. Her beauty paled in comparison with that of my new bank card.

On that night (as always) Foxy stuck close to Stary, and I (for the first time) tried to remain as far away from him as possible.

On that night Foxy was just a vague red spot, a red spot that was no longer important and that would remain part of the past.

On that night I ignored Foxy. I was busy thinking about my bank card, about its golden sheen, about the fifty grand on it. Everything turned out to be so much simpler than I’d expected. Destitute Russia, the fund that we had started, got good press, and the Merciful Monsters Charity Ball was covered in all the media. Stary was on TV and radio, and the announcers never forgot to announce the charity’s bank account number, or else it appeared at the bottom of the screen. Stary’s face appeared on huge billboards all over the city. Hey, there’s one of them now—by the Belorusskay train station, over by the exit to the bridge!

I designed the ad myself. It’s too bad the reeking losers in the bus are sleeping. It’s too bad they don’t see how well I had everything planned! In the picture, Stary has one arm around a neatly dressed but still unhappy-looking homeless woman, and his other around Philipp Kirkorov, who is dressed up like Freddy Krueger. Instead of a knife, there is a wad of dollars in Freddy’s ring-studded hand. He is handing the dollars to the bum, and the bum is leaning toward him—a true idyll. There was another version with Ksyusha Sobchak in a black evening gown with vampire fangs and a stack of dollars again. The slogan reads, Become a real human, show mercy (or, We don’t need blah-blah, we need ChaBa!). And, of course, the account number below.

Not many ordinary citizens wanted to become real humans, even little by little. Anyway, I hadn’t exactly been counting on ordinary citizens to begin with.

The most important of the posh guests were sent invitations embossed in (real) gold, and of course the bank account number was written on each one. Those monsters went all out.

Having journeyed through the accounts of various individuals and organizations (those of you who have sent money on such a journey will understand; as for those of you who haven’t, tough luck), a sum of half a million dollars ended up in my bank account. As a matter of fact, that is the same amount—$500,000—that Stary spent on the media campaign in preparation for ChaBa. The natural monetary cycle had gone full circle; nothing personal and nothing extra. Nobody knew a thing and everyone was happy. Stary had drawn some good PR, the merciful monsters had gotten their publicity, the television viewers had gotten their circuses, and I had received my bread. The only one who didn’t get anything was Destitute Russia; but no matter how much you give destitute Russia, it will never be enough. Even the guys in the gauze masks know that. Eh, guys?

Just in case, purely by intuition I stayed away from Stary at the ball. I also had a ticket in my pocket for a plane that would take me across the planet the very next day. If you were to examine the situation as a whole, then of course Stary had no real reason to be upset with me, even if he were to find out about my golden bank card. But Stary rarely examined a situation from afar. In that respect he was nearsighted. He looked at things close-up, made decisions quickly, and shot unexpectedly (though not himself, of course). Furthermore, I would no longer be working for him; and, well, yes—I had a ticket …

“Ladies, choose your partners!”

When the slow dance was announced, Death approached me slowly. She invited me without a word, motioning with her hand. She was not ugly. She was just your average old lady with a scythe, a skull mask, thick white hair, and a mantle that reached down to the floor; but I had no desire to dance with her. Nonetheless, I nodded politely and stepped toward her. The hand that beckoned me was wrapped in a white leather glove covered in little diamond studs. I took one look at that glove and I knew it would be better not to refuse her request. God knows whose spoiled little bitch I might offend in the process. It would be so stupid to get a bullet in the head, not because of my new credit card, shiny and golden like life itself, but because of somebody’s bitch dressed up like Death.

I took her by the waist, which was surprisingly slim beneath the shapeless clothing, with a slight feeling of disgust. We began to dance and she leaned close to me with her bony face. The synthetic locks of gray hair tickled my nose, and I prepared myself for the smell of rot, the smell of decomposition and mold, but I sensed none of this. There was only the smell of expensive perfume. Only when she laughed, only when she spoke quietly, only then did I notice the thick red locks peering out from beneath her wig.

“But you weren’t wearing a disguise …”

“I put one on so Stary wouldn’t recognize me.”

“Why do you want to hide from him?”

“What do you mean ‘why’?” asked Foxy. “So that I can dance with you.”

“You took that costume with you just so you could dance with me?”

“Yes,” said Foxy. “Yes, yes!”

And then she lifted her mask up, just a little, and she kissed me. Very gently. She tasted of cheap apricot-flavored chewing gum. She made my head spin. I lost my voice.

Stary’s guys were nearby. Some of them were even looking at us funny.

“They see us!” I gasped, leading her to the center of the hall.

“Not us. They saw you,” said Foxy calmly. “You, dancing with Death. They couldn’t have recognized me.”

And she kissed me again, and I thought it was a good thing I was wearing loose trousers. At first I was thinking of wearing those tight black ones …

Then she asked me: “How are you going to spend your five hundred grand?”

And at that moment the size of my pants didn’t matter, because all of that blood poured right back to my brain and temples. My head stopped spinning, and for a moment I let go of Foxy, but then hugged her and pulled her toward me again. I shook her to the music and asked her the stupidest question that I could, given the situation. “How do you know? How?”

And Foxy Lee said it was hidden mics. She said there were tapes. She said that Stary recorded all my telephone conversations. “Don’t be afraid, no one heard them but me. I took them with me, and Stary doesn’t know … I was the only one who heard them, only me, only me …”

Listening to her hot apricot whisper I understood for the first time in my life that it was possible to kill for money.

But maybe killing her wouldn’t be necessary. After all, she is very beautiful, and I’m no stranger to mercy. Besides, killing her wouldn’t be that easy, the little snake!

“Is 50 percent enough for you?” I asked, feeling like a gentleman.

She suddenly pulled her hand out of my grasp. She pulled her hand away and shook it as though it had been burned.

“You want more?” I asked, dumbstruck.

She stepped back. Then again. Then she removed her mask.

Her face was pale, so pale that her golden freckles seemed brown. There were tears in her eyes, though maybe they were just shining with anger. Her lips were trembling like a child moments away from wailing out loud.

“I don’t need your money,” said Foxy Lee. “I just wanted to give you all the tapes. Just in case.”

She pulled out a parcel from underneath her gown and handed it to me.

If only I hadn’t hurt Foxy Lee’s feelings. If only she hadn’t taken off that mask.



The merciful in masks are giving the bums grub—instant ramen noodles. I also grab the noodles, so as not to stick out from the rest of them, but I can’t eat the stuff. I can’t get it down my throat.

Don’t ever trying eating ramen noodles in a bus packed full of bums, even if you’re really hungry.

To be clear, I hadn’t eaten in more than a day. But I gave away my portion to the guys at the back of the bus (incidentally, no one sat down next to me, which is typical—as though I was the one reeking like a thousand dead rats, not them). Then I went back to my seat.

At Paveletskaya station we pick up three more bums. They stink worse than the seven from Savelovskaya. They are seated in the only remaining free seats, right next to me.



If I hadn’t offended Foxy Lee, if she hadn’t taken off her mask, everything might have been different. Stary wouldn’t have realized that Death, the disgusting old lady with a scythe I’d been feeling up, was his woman, his redheaded little fox. He wouldn’t have sicced his bald assholes on me, and I wouldn’t have dropped the parcel with the tapes onto the floor when the fuckers bent my hand behind my back. And Stary wouldn’t have heard the tapes, and would never have known where the charity money went, and he wouldn’t have ripped up my airplane ticket, and he wouldn’t have taken my golden bank card, and I wouldn’t have ended up tied to a chair in a secret room in his mansion on the bank of the Yauza River … if only I hadn’t offended Foxy.

Though it must be said that things didn’t end so bad after all. Really, everything turned out great, and apart from the stench I have to put up with now, I’m actually happy.

My gold card is with me again, and my half-million is still on it—I checked. Early in the morning I’ll get off this shit-wagon and take in a lungful of clean, cold air at Kursk station. One of our guys will meet me there with new documents and tickets for the Moscow-Odessa train in a third-class car. “We can’t have the documents done before the morning,” said Foxy. “The main thing is that they don’t find you during the night, and in the morning you get on the train. No one in his right mind will look for you in a third-class car.” In Odessa I’ll meet Foxy Lee and we’ll board a ferry for Istanbul. (“No one in his right mind will look for us on that lousy raft full of cheap whores and Ukrainian profiteers sleeping on their striped bags.”)

“Does the ferry operate in the winter?” I asked.

“Of course it does!” said Foxy “How do you know?”

“Cause I’ve been on it.”

“With the cheap whores?”

She looked at me sadly, with mild surprise. Like a stray dog being punished for a puddle of urine from yesterday that had already seeped into the floor.

“The cots were hard,” Foxy said thoughtfully. “And sometimes the boat tossed and heaved like mad. Do you get seasick?”

I don’t get seasick. And no one will spoil the moment for me. We’ll be on a Turkish ferry, and I’ll be drinking whiskey and Foxy will have liqueur, and we’ll walk around on the deck and enjoy the waves. And all night we’ll roll around on one of those hard cots, then sleep awhile, and then I’ll fuck her again.

I’ll fuck her at dawn when we’re coming into the Bosphorus.

We’ll spend the day in Istanbul and have Turks shine our shoes and fill us up with tea. They’ll pour our coffee for us, and stare at Foxy and call her Guzel, and then in the evening we’ll fly away to the other side of the world. We’ll buy ourselves hats and sunscreen, and we’ll eat fruit and play tennis and snort coke. We’ll fly on a glider and swim in the ocean every day.

And every day, every single day, I am going to thank her. Because if it wasn’t for Foxy, I would be swimming in the Yauza River right now underneath a layer of ice. I’d be blue, swollen, and dead.

Foxy saved me.

It happened when I no longer had any hope at all. I was sitting naked, tied to the chair in the middle of the room. Stary stood opposite me, looking at me with an expression of boredom in the face.

“You used to work out?” he asked finally, nodding at my six-pack abdomen.

Stary himself was heavy—not too overweight, about twenty pounds, but he hated sports.

“I work out,” I said. I didn’t want to use the past tense.

“You did,” Stary corrected me. “You used to work out.”

Again, a pause hung in the air.

“Are you gonna beat me up?” I asked, just to break the silence.

He shook his head. No, he wasn’t going to beat me. He was just waiting for the guys to bring him a bucket.

Not only was Stary fascinated with the world of film, he was also interested in literature. His favorite book was Billy Bathgate by E.L. Doctorow. He especially liked the scene where Schultz the Mafia boss orders his men to put the “cement slippers” on the traitor, Bo Weinberg, and then throw him into the sea.

An ice hole in the Yauza River was much more effective than the ocean. They could drill a hole in no time. But cement mix and a bucket were harder to come by, even in Stary’s mansion. So he had to send his thugs out to buy both. They’d been gone more than thirty minutes, and it was getting late. (They got the bucket right away, at the Atrium, as a matter of fact. They’d hit some snags with the cement mix, though.) They called Stary every few minutes to relate their latest fiasco.

I was shaking.

“I’m cold,” I said, but he didn’t answer.

Stary’s cell phone rang once again, the theme song from the movie Boomer, and I gave a start. I began to shudder violently. Not because of the cold; it was just that I didn’t want to die.

“What do you mean you still haven’t gotten it?”

There are people like that—they look like teddy bears, with button eyes and a button nose. But when they get angry, they look like hawks.

Stary is that kind—when he gets angry, his dull gray eyes take on a noble, mercuric hue, and the earthy shade of his face drains to an aristocratic paleness. His unremarkable nose becomes beaklike, and his bushy brows rise and fall like deathly black wings. In other words, he was handsome when he was angry (and because he was often in such a state, you could say he was handsome most of the time).

“Bastards!” Stary yelled into the phone. “Drive over to Palych’s construction site and have him pour some for you!”

That was when Foxy came in. Stary didn’t see her; he was standing with his back to her. But I saw everything perfectly. She was barefoot, messy looking, her red hair was tangled, and her right cheek looked swollen. She peered at him with hatred, with absolute hatred—such absolute hatred that I even felt the malicious pleasure of a jealous male, although god knows I had more important things to focus on just then.

“I’m telling you, he’s got cement!”

Still keeping her eyes on his back, she took a figurine off the shelf (not even a figurine—it was more like a bronze blob, a piece, as they say, of modern art) and approached him, stepping softly with her bare feet. She waited for him to say, “Okay, see ya,” and hang up before she hauled off and slammed that piece of modern art into the back of his head.

Slowly, and somehow picturesquely, he fell.

He died almost immediately. His last words were: “I’m cold.”

He really did love the movies, poor guy. A rug spattered in blood, his woman, her hands stained red, “I’m cold”—so Hollywood. Until Foxy Lee untied me and I had checked his pulse, I almost thought he was faking it.

But he died for real.

Naked, shivering, and pathetic, standing over Stary’s dead body, I offended Foxy again. I asked her what she wanted—as in, how much I owed her for the favor. I gave the dead body a little kick.

That’s when she started to cry. She cried long and hard, like a baby, like an inconsolable child. She was probably crying like that the first day Stary brought her here. She was sobbing and gasping and she couldn’t stop. She kept saying, “I don’t nee … nee … nee …” I hugged her and stroked her hair. I felt ashamed, really ashamed, even before she managed to say, “I don’t need anything. I did it for you. He wanted to kill you!”

I was ashamed. I hid my face in her hair and asked her to forgive me.

Then she whispered: “If you want me, you can have me.”

I was already naked, and she undressed quickly. Stary was staring at us out of one bloodied eye. He kept watching silently as I got the answers to my questions.

I found out that Foxy moans.

And that her eyes stay open, but her pupils dilate and become huge and crazed, like two black full moons.

And I found out that she smells like an animal and a child at the same time, and she tastes salty, like the sea. That her nipples are hard and brown, and that she has freckles, not only on her face but on her shoulders. And that there is a thin line of red hair that stretches from her navel to her pubis.

Then she gave me some clothing, his clothing, because Stary had thrown mine away, and she gave me a stack of dollar bills (his) and she gave me a gun (his) and the gold bank card. My bank card.

As I was leaving, I asked her, “What about you? Are you gonna be okay?”

And she answered: “What about me? They’ll be looking for you, not me. I’ll stay here and I’ll be miserable. I’ll say he was lying there when I came into the room.” She nodded at Stary.

Apparently, I didn’t look too ecstatic.

“All you have to do is make it through the night,” said Foxy. “If we both run away, then they’ll look for both of us and we won’t have any chance at all. If we do it this way, I’ll have everything fixed up by morning. Then you’ll step off the bus and my guy … our guy, that is, will give you new documents, tickets, and new clothes. You have to believe me, honey, no one in his right mind would go looking for you in that stinking bus. No one in his right mind will look for you on a third-class train. We’ll meet up in Odessa, okay? Is that okay with you?”

I had no objections, because the plan made sense. I had no objections, because I was in love. I had no objections, because Foxy Lee is my guardian angel. Because doubting her would be a sin. She killed him for my sake. And in doing so she harmed herself. That’s a fact. It’s a paradox. I keep thinking about it, and I never stop being amazed: because Stary was the one guarantee she had in life. In killing him, she lost everything—the mansion on the banks of the Yauza River, money, clothes, perfume, bling, expensive cars, shopping trips to the Atrium—everything.

What would she get in exchange for all that?

Stary was married, but not to Foxy. His wife lived in a modest three-story building on Rublevsky Highway. With the help of a maid, a physical trainer, and two nannies, she took care of their son. Stary came to visit them from time to time. Foxy knew about it. Stary had bequeathed everything to his wife and son. Foxy knew about that too.

So what would she get in exchange for all that?

Me. Just me. And with no guarantees.



It’s still dark outside the window, but it’s already morning. We’re on our way back. We’re already close: there’s that goddamned Atrium on the other side of Sadovaya. Only five or ten minutes left, no more. All we have to do is turn around at Taganka and drive a little ways to get there, to Kursk. It’s really early, and the Atrium is as depressing as an abandoned medieval castle.

Things are going good, as Stary used to like to say. Soon this will all be over. Things are going good. One of our guys will meet me on the platform. I’ll board the Moscow-Odessa train, a third-class car, and, finally, I’ll get some sleep. No, first I’ll go to the dining car and grab something to eat. Then I’ll go to sleep. Things are going good. Except that—

There’s one little thing, one small thing that won’t let go of me. Like the dull end of a drill, it pierces my brain. Some business I forgot to take care of, or an unanswered e-mail, a mistake in a quarterly financial report, or the last piece of a puzzle that has fallen behind the couch.

I still haven’t been able to figure out what that little thing is. Maybe it’s just exhaustion, some inconsequential glitch in my nervous system, some whim, and it would probably be best to ignore it. I should just look out the window and not think, not think, not think …

I’m just looking out the window—at the road, at the traffic lights, at the Atrium.

The Mercy Bus driver turns on the radio:

“… record-breaking cold this month, temperatures tonight have plunged down to thirty-eight below! But it’s going to heat up today, we have a warm front coming in …”

“… to understand her you gotta know her deep inside, hear every thought, see every …”

“… shhhhhhhhhhhhh …”

The bus driver turns the dials mercilessly.

“… regardless of what you say, transformation on that scale is only possible in a democratic society …”

“… have you ever really really really ever loved a woman?”

“… I’ll send you sky-high for a star! …”

“And now for our top news bulletin. A police spokesman has confirmed that the primary suspect in the murder of Nikolai Starkovsky, State Duma deputy and owner of the Star Oil company, is Andrei Kaluzhsky, PR manager for Star Oil and organizer of the Merciful Monsters Charity Ball, which took place in Moscow on the night before the murder. According to police, they have ample evidence implicating Kaluzhsky in the murder. At present, according to investigative authorities, Andrei Kaluzhsky is in hiding somewhere in Moscow. He has not left the city. ‘I simply cannot believe that this man would commit premeditated murder,’ said Elizabeth ‘Foxy’ Lesnitskaya, girlfriend of the late deputy, in an interview. ‘Andrei was so kind and honest. The whole ChaBa was his idea. It was a lovely charity event, which has already helped hundreds of homeless people!’”

Foxy Lee, my red-haired girl. How kind and foolish you are to protect me. Hold on a little while, soon this will all be over. We’re already pulling up. Here we are at the station.

The bus comes to a stop.

No one in his right mind will go looking for me in a third-class car on the Moscow-Odessa train, will they?

“… police are doing all they can to find …”

The merciful in masks are walking down the aisle. Drowning out the blaring radio, they announce: “The Mercy Bus has arrived at Kursk station. Those who can leave the bus by themselves should do so now. Extra medical treatment will be provided for those who are sick or cannot walk. Those of you who are seriously ill can check in at the local hospital.”

The swollen, smelly passengers pry their eyes open, hoisting themselves lazily and awkwardly out of their seats.

“… A photograph and description of the suspect have been sent to all police stations, airports, and trains stations. Police are on high alert …”

I stand up and walk slowly down the aisle behind the stooped, stinking zombies.

Through the bus window I see a police car, its lights flashing. Standing next to the car is an officer—that asshole from yesterday—and a herd of other cops.

A photograph and description of the suspect have been sent to all police stations. He’ll recognize me. Dammit! He’ll recognize me right away. He saw me here yesterday. He’ll remember me for sure. I won’t be able to get by without being seen!

Stay here. I have to stay in the bus.

“… The Criminal Investigation Department says that by today …”

“You can walk!” a person in a medical mask yells right in my ear. “Please get off the bus!”

“… Some news just in about the murder …”

“I can’t,” I whisper weakly in response. “Help. I need medical assistance.”

I need to stay here, no matter what, I need to be here. I’ll give them all the money. They need money too, right? They’re merciful guys, I’ll give them the whole wad of money. Hey, who in this stinking bus wants a stack of greenbacks for taking me to the hospital?

“I need treatment! I’ll pay—”

“Money?” The young man in the mask frowns, looking at my reeking clothes. “What are you talking about? C’mon, c’mon, get off the bus!” he says, giving me a gentle shove in the back.

I fall forward in the aisle and begin to moan quietly.

“Are you all right?” the boy asks in concern.

“It’s my heart,” I mutter into the floor. “Or blood pressure … I have a problem with my blood pressure.”

I roll my eyes back. I gasp for breath.

I’m staying here. I am not getting out.

“Lean on me,” says the young man in the mask. “It’s just a few steps, there you go. The nurse is in the driver’s cabin. Here, I’ll help you. She’ll check your blood pressure. There you go. Now sit down and roll up your shirt sleeve.”

They check my blood pressure. By some miracle it’s very high. Through the driver’s window I watch the herd of hungry cops. They’re not going to get me.

The nurse and the boy in the mask are whispering to each other.

“Hypertension,” the nurse whispers to him almost inaudibly. “We can’t let him go.”

“… Meanwhile, the Star Oil company will go to the wife of the late Andrei Starkovsky who will inherit, quote, only debts and conflicts with it …”

“An injection,” says the sister of mercy. “A diuretic. And check him into the hospital. That’s the only option.”

He goes outside. She pulls down my shirt sleeve, wipes my arm with an icy, disinfected cotton swab, and injects the needle. I guess I’m just lucky. I never had high blood pressure in my life, and now all of a sudden—there you go, hypertension!

“… ‘My husband neglected to pay his taxes,’ Ms. Starkovsky said in an open statement to members of the press. ‘Just a few days before his death, he transferred all the Star Oil shares to the account of a front organization. I have no intention of suffering for the illegal machinations of a person whom I haven’t lived with for a number of years’ …”

Front organization … front organization. I have hypertension and my head is swimming and everything is going dark. I am shaking my head and pinching my cheeks and my ears, and I want to crawl out of this darkness. I need to get ahold of myself, because I think I have just found the missing piece of the puzzle.

I watch as the transparent liquid leaves the needle.

“… These companies are formally owned by Elizabeth Lesnitskaya. ‘From a legal perspective, this is absolutely above board,’ said Lesnitskaya’s lawyer, Gennady Burkalo. ‘My client is the owner of the aforementioned companies. These companies were formed in accordance with the law. The funds transferred from Star Oil to the accounts of these firms by Mr. Starkovsky, regardless of his motives, now belong to …”

“One hundred million dollars,” says the nurse, and jerks the needle out of my vein.

I feel sick. I can’t breathe. It smells so bad in here I think I’m going to die. The gauze mask distorts her voice, but I recognize it anyway. She takes off her nurse’s cap and her red hair cascades to her shoulders.

“You thought I needed your shitty card? One hundred million, and it’s all mine!”

I feel sick to my stomach. Blood is pulsing in my ears.

My hands are shaking, but still I feel for the gun in my pocket.

“It’s not loaded,” Foxy whispers gently.

“I’ll tell them it was you.”

“You won’t tell them anything,” Foxy says, leaning toward my ear. She smells like perfume and apricot-flavored chewing gum. “You won’t tell them anything at all.”

“What did you give me?” I yell, crazed. “What did you put into me?”

There is no one but us on the bus. The merciful in masks are helping the bums toward the station.

“WHAT DID YOU GIVE ME!” I scream, and one of them turns at the sound of my cry. He leaves the bum he was walking with and runs toward the bus.

“Everything’s fine,” says the masked merciful Foxy Lee. “Don’t worry, we’re all right.”

He looks at me. I’m going to be sick. I fall onto the floor.

“She gave me with something …” I whisper. “Help me …” I can’t scream.

“Don’ be scared, it won’ hurt,” and he pulls his mask off. There he is. The leather guy from yesterday.

“Mercy,” he says with a smile. “We show mercy.”

Another guy in a mask comes up and nods at me. “What happened?”

“Hypertension,” Foxy answers. “We gave him a shot.”

No! I want to scream. But my tongue won’t obey me. I want to scream, Ambulance! But instead I just mumble and drool.

I am lying on the floor of the bus.

I think I am dying.

“The shot didn’t help,” says Foxy Lee sadly.

“Should I call an ambulance?” asks the young man in the mask.

“It’s no use, he’s already dying.”

“Well then, you’ve suffered your last,” says the boy in the mask. “Great is the mercy of God. Blessed are the poor.” He snivels juicily and crosses himself.

They pick me up off the floor and prop me in the driver’s seat.

It’s cold. It’s so cold.

I am waiting for mercy. It should be here any minute now.





GOLD AND HEROIN





BY VYACHESLAV KURITSYN

Leningradsky Avenue





Translated by Mary C. Gannon

She was walking barefoot along Leningradsky Avenue. The occasional streetlight and moon hung in the puddles on the ground. She jumped from one puddle to the next, enjoying the warm splash. She held one red high heel in her hand by the strap. The other shoe she had lost while crossing the street around the Sovietsky Hotel.

His thoughts were steeped in gold, like the chest of a war hero buried in medals and crosses. Zemfira was singing about river ports. The highway was empty. The Sovietskaya Inn had recently metamorphosed into the Sovietsky Hotel. Prostitutes had become twice as expensive. Suddenly he saw a kitten on the road in front of the car. He stepped on the brakes, then got out. It wasn’t a kitten. He picked up a red high heel by its strap. The shoe was lying just next to the entrance of the Romany Gypsy theater.

For some reason he brought the red shoe into the car. A shoe without a girl. The clocked showed 2:55 a.m.

Once again he thought of shipments of Yakutst gold to jewelry factories in Smolensk. Stalls were scattered along the street like cheap bijouterie. Occasionally, a fat pearl of a foreign-made car would swim by.

Cheaper and flatter-chested girls loomed at the intersection with Stepan Suprun Road. They say that Suprun was a test pilot. The whole area was celestial. Across the street at Khodynka Field was the place Chkalov had crashed. The street itself ran all the way to Sheremetyevo Airport.

She’s nuts, he thought, nearing Airport subway station, when he saw her jumping along the sidewalk on one leg like she was playing hopscotch. He noticed a red high heel in her hand.

She watched intently as the door of a blue limousine opened on her left. Slowly, as though in a dream, so slowly that she was completely absorbed in it, she remembered her friend’s contorted face, a gold tooth in a ring of purple lipstick. Boney fingers shaking a wad of green bills that she had tried to steal from her friend earlier that day. It seemed to her it was a helicopter that had come for her, not a car. She thought she’d have to fly to take the ruby star off the Kremlin spire. She leaned toward the door. A man deep inside the car smiled at her and handed her the other high heel.

She hopped into the car and moved her lips. Inside it was warm, and she realized that she had been cold. She quickly fell asleep.

At home in the bright light he noticed heavy brown knots on her slim bare arms. He looked into her eyes and saw that her pupils were completely dilated, a shiny opaque red, and runny, like broken egg yolk.

“Hot … hot!” she yelled. Actually, she yelled the first word; the second she whispered. And fell silent, as though she had lost her voice.

“Hot tea?” he asked.

She shook her head.

“A hot bath, then?” he asked.

She nodded.

He pointed to the door. In one sharp movement she pulled off her short blue dress and was left wearing nothing but white panties adorned with an orange mushroom. And before he could focus his gaze on her small tits, she had already flown past him.

When he was young, he too could wander around the city aimlessly with no memories or money. In the beginning of his career he was a heroin dealer. He was a drug mule, moving bags of the stuff from Warsaw to Moscow. Once he got caught on the Polonez train at Belorussky station. By some miracle he’d been able to escape, fleeing underneath the cars and over the sidings. He’d probably still be in the slammer if they had caught him.

Through making counterfeit Adidas sneakers in an invalids’ cooperative, renting pirated videos, and running car dealerships in old movie theaters, he came to gold.

Gold is like heroin. It’s simple, homogenous, and omnivorous.

She had been in the bathroom for an alarmingly long time. He knocked at the door to tell her. And to give her a bathrobe. She didn’t answer, and he pushed the door open: she was leaning toward the mirror, staring into it, bent and skinny. Heavy black shadows seemed to pass over her face, although he couldn’t quite make it out. Maybe they were just reflections cast from the mirror. He called to her. She grabbed some small scissors from the shelf under the mirror and slipped her fragile body out of the bath. Her body was smooth, save for the overgrown shrubbery of her pubis—just the way he liked it.

She threw herself at him. He tried to catch her hand, but she dodged him and sunk the scissors deep into the skin just above his ear. He jumped back, spilling blood on the rug with a picture of a proud eagle on it. He tripped and bumped into the telephone. She waved her arm, the scissors snapped shut, and he was left with the receiver in his hand, its cord dangling uselessly. Okay then, he thought, and felt for the cell phone in his pocket. He took the scissors away from her and pushed her back into the bathroom. He called his friend, the owner of a private drug rehabilitation clinic, waking him up with the insistent ring.

She didn’t recognize him at first, but when he came to visit her the third or fourth time, she smiled. A crooked smile, as though her lip had been cut, like a two-way street. He wanted her even more.

They walked around the park on the grounds of the clinic, and she ate two or three berries from the festively ripe pound he had bought for her. She pressed her hand against the bark of a tree for a long time, carefully studying a ladybug. She traced circles and arrows in the sand with great concentration while his phone buzzed and he answered it.

It amazed him how slowly she did everything, how quietly her gaze and her bloodstream glided along. He slowed down too, dug at the bark of the tree, and found a mushroom. After he drove through the gate, leaving the clinic behind, he forced the arrow of the speedometer ahead sharply, to win back the minutes he had lost with her. This sharp change in rhythm shocked and disturbed him.

She asked him to bring her books, and not trusting his assistants, he went to the bookstore himself and bought her Pushkin and Dostoevsky, weighing the heavy volumes in his hand. He estimated how much a piece of gold that size would weigh, and how long it would take someone to read books that heavy. He even tried to read them. But reading was hard; life seemed to get out of sync, and lulls and pauses crept in, as though it had gotten soft and mushy, lost its elasticity. His own life, straight as an arrow, became entangled with his girlfriend’s, twisted and confused. During his visits to her he would suddenly find himself rehashing yesterday’s business meeting in his mind, searching for weaknesses in his performance.

And during important negotiations he would suddenly go quiet. Closing his eyes, he would see her face before him, and the brown knots on her thin arms. Two weeks later he realized he had an aching in his chest every day. Probably because of the changes in his blood pressure and pace of life.

He did something he had been planning to do for several years: he had an hourglass made for himself with real gold dust in it, and he put it on the desk in his office. He began to disengage from life more often. Suddenly interrupting a dictation or a dressing-down, he would turn the hourglass over, hanging on the steady flow of the dull yellow sand.

They pumped out half of her blood and filled her with many liters of somebody else’s. She didn’t know that it contained his blood too. She slept for a long time, lost in the drone of the blood of strangers rushing through her veins.

She tried to coax it along in her weak body: to tame it, combine it with her own, to learn to live with it. She prodded, nudged, pleaded, and persuaded. But some of the blood just didn’t want to fit in, the way the last fragment of an almost-finished puzzle can go alien and resistant. It was then that she would launch her body against a wall with all her might, or toss a water jug at the window, or throw herself at the feet of the janitor and start chewing the dirty mop. Her blood needed the comfort of a warm fix. Then she begged for the shot, which she was permitted at this stage in her treatment; only she had to wait, and the dose was smaller.

He asked his friend at the clinic whether she could be cured, and the friend answered that she could—but not right away, and never entirely, because of the quantities of heroin that had traveled through her system. He went on to say that he had an acquaintance with a clinic somewhere in the Alps on a magic mountain, where they slowed down the lives of their patients so much that they needed their fix only once every six months, and they could live like that for a hundred years. His friend said that he wouldn’t be able to keep her in his clinic for too long, that according to a new law, private rehabilitation clinics would soon be outlawed and their patients would end up either in basements or in state-run institutions no better than prisons, with beatings and bars on the windows. His friend said that the most important thing now was for her to get off the carousel of misfortune and blood transfusions, to stop spinning around and around in her body and mind. She would have to change her lifestyle, take a trip to the sea or spend time at a resort, reading books and sunning herself on the beach. She must not see her old friends or familiar streets, where every bush would remind her of a dirty needle. She should go somewhere filled with the babbling of an incomprehensible foreign language, where unfamiliar birds sing in the trees. And when he asked for how long, his friend thought for a while, then said: “Very long.”

He shut himself up in his office, turned off the phone, set down the gold-dust hourglass in the middle of the table, and counted out all his money in real estate, stocks and bonds, jewels, banks. He had enough to last a lifetime. There would even be some left over for his children. And if the bonds weren’t cashed anytime soon, even his grandchildren would have something. He told his partners that he wanted to bail out and disappear forever, that he was ready to hand over his shares on terms advantageous to them. But the important thing was that it had to be done immediately. His partners thought it over and sketched out a business plan on sheets of white paper, illustrating how much of the company was upheld by his own personal connections, which routes of money and gold were dependent solely upon him. “Give us all the connections, and then you can call it a day,” his partners said.

“That will take six months,” he begged. “That’s your problem,” they said.

He then transferred as much of his money as he could access to an anonymous account in a faraway bank. That money would not be enough for a whole lifetime, and would not be enough to leave something for his children, but it would be enough for half a lifetime. And that, if you think about it, is not such a short time. He deposited the rest of his fortune on an anonymous credit card, bought two false passports and plane tickets, paid a visit to the friend who ran the private clinic to get a note for the guard, and drove off to get her. By the Baku movie theater, where he’d had his first car dealership, there was a traffic jam unlike any he had ever seen in that neighborhood.

Distraught that he had not visited her in three days, and so must have decided to leave her, she decided to commit suicide that night. She had stolen the key to the attic long before, and now crawled to the edge of the roof from which she would throw herself headfirst into the dark green treetops. To fall right through them and end up lying lifeless on the neat gravel walkway. She concentrated, took a deep breath, and sucked in her stomach, calculating the angle of her leap. She mustered all her strength, then fell asleep from the exertion.

At that moment he was standing at the railroad crossing by Grazhdanskaya station, looking at his watch and waiting for a long freight train to pass. It must have had few hundred cars in it.

She stood, eyes closed, on the very edge of the roof, and slept. And she dreamed that she had changed her mind and returned to her room, that she lay down to sleep with a childlike smile on her lips, and that she would live. In fact, she stepped off the roof and out onto the long branch of a tall tree leading to the middle of the park; and she began to walk on it, not opening her eyes, like a tightrope walker. She had never walked on a tightrope before; she had a terrible sense of balance.

He hurried to the clinic, woke up the guard to show him the note, entered the grounds, looked up at her window, and discovered her walking high up above him. Her arms were flapping like the wings of a bird in slow motion. Her white nightgown was fluttering in the sultry night air. Inside his pocket, his beeper, which he had forgotten to turn off, sounded. It was his partners, who had discovered discrepancies in his accounts, as well as his disappearance, and were trying bring him to his senses. The beeper startled her. She opened her eyes, her foot slipped, and she fell down right into his outstretched arms.



There was an explosion on their airplane as it was landing. First, purple smoke filled the plane’s interior for about three minutes; these were the most frightening minutes of their lives. Then there was an explosion that knocked them both unconscious.

The burning plane gave off such unbearable heat that he came to very quickly. She was lying next to him, her neck at a strange angle, a little bird that had been executed. He turned her onto her back and she immediately opened her eyes.

He patted his pockets and pulled out his wallet. The credit card had snapped in half. The electronic notebook where he had saved the number of the bank account was smashed to pieces. The suitcase that contained a written copy of the number had burned, along with the rest of the luggage.

He no longer had any way of getting to his money. It was doomed to move around through the accounts of a distant bank, enriching the bank’s owners, just as the gold of Jews murdered during the war underpinned the might of Swiss banks many years later. He told her this, and she nodded.

“I am Jewish,” she said. “That’s great,” he said, then added, “We have to get out of here. If I’m seen on TV, they’ll find me and kill me.” They got up onto their feet and took off. All around them, dying people moaned. A woman mumbled in a foreign language, but more blood than words came out of her mouth. There were body parts strewn about. The head of a dog traveling in a special pet carrier in the next row over had been torn off, but was still trying to yap. It seemed that they were the only ones who had survived. It was a mile to the woods where they could take cover.

The remains of the plane and its passengers were scattered far and wide over the surrounding area. Halfway toward the woods that would shelter them, they came upon the body of a large man in a Versace suit. He had seen this man on the airplane, flying first class. The man’s face had been pounded into mush. His suit had not suffered, and looked as though it was draped on a dummy. “Look,” he said.

“Look,” she said. The lining of the expensive coat was ripped, and a black cellophane package had fallen out of it. She squatted down and took a pinch of the gray powder into the palm of her hand. From out of nowhere, a bright emerald bug landed in her palm and sank into the soft powder. “Is this—?” he asked. “Yes,” she answered, “no doubt about it.” It was heroin.

It was an offer to begin again, in the very same way. And it was just in the nick of time, since they had turned up in a foreign country without any money or livelihood, and with documents they couldn’t use again; since their bodies would be missing at the sight of the crash, they would be put on a watch list. Money, they needed money. She was still sitting on her haunches, and her face turned sharply pink, and then black, as though she’d already had her fix.

She tossed the powder away and rolled up the sleeve of the Versace jacket. “A Rolex,” she said. The Rolex was still ticking—a fat gold watchband, and a watch face encrusted with large diamonds.

What do you know, a watch. This time he’ll start with a watch.





IN THE NEW DEVELOPMENT





BY LUDMILLA PETRUSHEVSKAYA

Prazhskaya





Translated by Keith Gessen and Anna Summers

This all happened in a Moscow suburb, in a new development. An engineer who worked at one of the ministries had long been on bad terms with his wife. They had a two-room apartment, with rugs, fine china, a color television, and all of it was in her name, and she would get everything if they divorced. The husband wasn’t from Moscow originally, he was from the impoverished provinces, and he’d come to his wife with the clothes he was wearing and nothing more. They’d been at school together, started seeing each other, then she got pregnant and he had no choice but to marry her—he was even threatened with expulsion from school, which was the sort of thing that could happen at the time.

The truth is, he already had a girlfriend. She was a year ahead of him, they were planning to get married and leave the city together, but the way the situation developed, if he refused to marry the pregnant girl his real girlfriend wouldn’t even receive her diploma—the pregnant girl’s father had put all sorts of pressure on the university, it turned out. So the student-engineer was forced to marry, and not just on paper, not just by signing some forms at city hall, but the whole nine yards. That is to say, for the sake of his beloved’s diploma (and she didn’t resist, by the way, though she shed hot tears and threatened to jump out the window when he was saying goodbye on his way out of the dormitory to the marriage registrar’s; the pregnant girl’s father was picking him up in his luxury car, a Volga), he was forced to go and live in that hateful house and remain in effect under surveillance, for two years, until he graduated. In that time his beloved was sent to work in the Caucasus, married a successful Dagestani, and gave birth to a daughter, who was an epileptic, or so they thought: she regularly turned blue and couldn’t breathe, so that the doctors told the mother she shouldn’t stop breast-feeding, and she didn’t, until the girl was practically old enough to go to school. The girl would eat some cereal and then point to her mother’s breast.

Vasily learned all this later, after college, when he ran into one of his old classmates at a bar. The classmate worked in the chemical industry and had traveled to Dagestan, where he learned everything about their old classmate and her baby girl. It turned out by then that the apparent epilepsy was actually a form of appendicitis. Once they cut out the appendix the girl’s suffering ended. Vasily by this time had forgotten all about his former girlfriend, and one thing he really didn’t want to hear about was children: his own wife had had a miscarriage in her sixth month. She lay in the hospital and their little baby was placed in an incubator, where for a month it lived, if it can be called that; the thing was half a pound, a packet of cottage cheese—it died and they weren’t even allowed to bury it, it didn’t even have a name, they were forced to leave the body at the institute.

Their torture lasted the entire month. His wife’s milk came, she went to the hospital four times a day to get her breasts pumped, but they didn’t necessarily give it to their little packet of cottage cheese; there were other babies, even better connected, and one of them survived despite being born at five and a half months. His wife couldn’t keep an eye on everyone, she wasn’t even allowed into the incubator room, she wasn’t even allowed to look at their little baby, even when it died, and after that she moaned and shook with tears day and night. The father-in-law also tried, gave gifts to the nurses, but they still couldn’t obtain the little corpse. The father-in-law didn’t know that he should bribe the boiler-room lady, she would have gladly avoided doing the dirty deed for a half-liter of vodka—she wasn’t paid extra for getting rid of corpses, about which she, half-drunk, once raised a stink in the payroll department.

In short, Vasily lived in this family of strangers, alone, his wife aggravated him terribly with all her crying, and he felt sorry for himself too, a child would have been just the thing, there would have been at least one person close to him in this world. But he kept quiet about his wish for a child, that’s just how he was. His wife practically burst out of her skin to get pregnant again but Vasily was very careful, he guarded his sperm like the apple of his eye.



Shortly after the wedding, the wife’s parents bought an apartment for their daughter and registered it in her name. Should anything happen, Vasily would get nothing—the property was an officially notarized loan to the wife from her parents, and that was that. The wife’s parents had covered all the bases; the only thing they didn’t understand was that they couldn’t keep winding the coil, one day it would spring back with all the pressure they’d put on it.

Finally Vasily’s wife got pregnant—in the end her desire for a baby, to wipe out the memory of their little packet of cottage cheese, was just too strong, and in cases like that, no matter how hard you try, the woman will think of something. She’ll get you drunk, or drug you, or do it with someone else. And sometimes the husband himself loses control. In short, they had a daughter (that other one, the first, would have been a son); they called her Alyonoshka, their little sunshine, and she grew up before him, all black hair and brown eyes, his very own daughter entirely, because her mother, Tamara, was as white as a moth. Vasily loved his little girl. Even on the night of the murder, on a snowy New Year’s Eve, when his wife was almost dead and the girl started crying, he came to her and sang her back to sleep, then returned to the bathroom and finished the hammering, smashed all the bones in her face and cut off her fingers so no one could identify her.

It should be said that Vasily had a big plastic bag at the ready, the kind used for storing furs, but how he got rid of all the blood, no one knows. Maybe he placed Tamara under a cold shower, but somehow or other there was no trace of blood. He wrapped her in a tablecloth—he later explained all this to the police—then stuffed her in the bag and threw it off the balcony into the blizzard (the snowstorm lasted all night). Vasily put his wife’s fingers in his overcoat—he’d somehow managed to remove them without making a lot of noise, apparently he just cut them right off. He took his daughter’s sled, tiptoed quietly downstairs, loaded the body on the sled, and took it over to the construction site next door, where because of the holiday no one was working. He hid the body in the snow at the site, down in the foundation pit, and stuck the fingers into a pipe, then began waiting for spring, to see if he’d be arrested.

He called the police to report that his wife had gone missing. Of course no one believed him. His father- and mother-in-law told the police all about his life with their daughter, and his coworkers informed them that Vasily was having an affair with an awful witch who kept him on a short leash and squeezed him for money but refused to marry him, because if he left his wife he’d be back in his single suit of clothes and he was thirty-two years old. Even the car that his father-in-law had arranged for him was registered as a loan to his wife. They’d surrounded him from all sides; nothing in the world belonged to him.

But now at least, after his wife’s death, he’d have four months of peace until the snow melted—and it was also possible that her body had been buried deep beneath the cement of the new building. Not long after the murder he’d strolled over to the construction site to see if he could find his burial plot, and he couldn’t; there were building materials everywhere, and everything was covered in snow.

The wife’s parents took their granddaughter to live with them, while Vasily was questioned on multiple occasions by a female police investigator. He kept insisting that he and his wife had gotten along poorly, that they’d had a bad fight on New Year’s Eve, that she had dressed and gone to her parents’, but that he had forbidden her from waking up their little girl.

At long last the snow melted. Nothing happened; the body of his wife was not found.



But one day in early June, Vasily showed up at the police station to tell the investigator that he’d murdered his wife. The investigator demanded that he prove it, at which point he led her and a team of investigators to the construction site, where workers had almost finished erecting the new buildling. The investigators couldn’t find the body, however, and there was no proof of the murder: no one had seen a body or a bag flying from the window on that busy New Year’s Eve, nor had they seen a sled, nor anything else Vasily described. He was not taken into custody. People did start saying that his conscience was getting the best of him, which is why he’d confessed, and why he’d abandoned his awful mistress—that is to say, he had changed.

Awhile later, Vasily called his father- and mother-in-law and told them that there was a finger with red nail polish sticking out of the faucet. His father-in-law responded that if Vasily had put Tamara’s fingers into a pipe, as he claimed, and this turned out to be part of the plumbing for the new building, then in the month since the building had been finished the finger would have dissolved, or swelled up, and it certainly couldn’t have traveled all the way through the water filter, and in any case what does the water system in the new building have to do with their building, which was built long ago? That’s what the father-in-law said to him, to calm him down, but this just made Vasily more anxious. Naturally, when the wife’s parents came over, they found nothing. Vasily said he was afraid to go into the bathroom; that the finger had probably disappeared down the drain.

And as proof, he showed his parents-in-law a flake of red nail polish that he’d found on the floor. But this didn’t prove anything, the parents said: so he found some red nail polish, big deal, many women had probably visited their home. And so Vasily still lives by himself, like an outcast, and still finds strands of hair and other evidence of his crime, and collects it all, as he gradually builds the case against himself.





WAIT





BY ANDREI KHUSNUTDINOV

Babushkinskaya





Translated by Marian Schwartz

He still had the deluxe paid for at the Izmailovo Delta, but he’d decided not to show his face there anymore and in fact to forget all about hotels for the next week or two. They were sure to have searched the registration databases. He circled around on the subway for an hour or so and got out at Babushkinskaya. At the kiosks by the underground crossing, people offered rooms for anyone who needed a cheap place to stay by the day, no papers required. Another half an hour later, armed with an address, he skirted snowbound Rayevsky Cemetery to a twelve-story apartment house on Olonetsky Lane. It was a dank December night. The low sky was blanketed with a floury haze, and it was snowing lightly.

He was met at the lobby door by an old woman who looked like she’d stepped out of a prewar photograph. Wearing a patched pea coat, big felt boots that forced her stance so wide that he was reminded of a hockey goalkeeper, and a fluffy scarf tied at her nape, she took his money and counted it, then asked for his passport. Confidently turning the book back to the right page, she ordered him to stand in the light. Not betraying any irritation, he moved toward the lit window and removed his cap. The old woman studied his face in the picture long and hard. There was obviously something she didn’t like about it. She sniffed her fleshy nose, squinted farsightedly, and bit her lower lip. Feeling his ears and crown starting to freeze, Veltsev put his cap back on, fished in his pockets for cigarettes, and watched the old woman examining his visas, not his photograph. He was about to ask her if she was out of her mind, when the old woman forestalled him by returning his passport and motioning for him to follow her into the building.

The lobby walls bore traces of a recent fire. The new doors of the first-floor apartments presented a striking contrast to all the other surfaces, which were either coated in smoke or peeling. With something that looked like a pass key used by a train conductor, the old woman opened a door right off the lobby and looked around before letting Veltsev move ahead of her. He walked in. At one time a fire had had the run of her front hall too. You could tell from the new layer of linoleum on the floor, the new wallpaper, the new paint on the ceiling, and the obvious, albeit blurred line where everything fresh and new jutted into the apartment.

“This is the deal. Don’t shit on the floor or piss in the bath. Or smoke in bed,” the old woman half-whispered from the door in parting. “Relax. Telephone’s in the kitchen. If you need anything, I’m Baba Agafia.” Before Veltsev knew what was happening she’d closed the door. The key turned twice in the lock.

He took a step back and, remembering something he wanted to ask, fumbled blindly at the door. There was no handle on the inside—just a loose bolt. In the keyhole he could see a trihedral rod, exactly like the ones in passenger train locks. Veltsev went into the kitchen to call to the old woman through the window, but when he jerked back the curtain he went limp. The grated window, silently ablaze with holiday lights, looked out on the backyard and cemetery wall, which was ringed by garages. Judging from the floor plan, the window of the sole bedroom opened in the same direction. There was no real need to check this, yet Veltsev squeezed between the rug-covered bed and the bureau and peeked behind the brocade curtain. It wasn’t that the view thus revealed astounded him—a big photograph of a tropical waterfall had been pasted onto a piece of plywood blocking the view—but this would probably have been the last thing he’d have expected to see behind the curtain.

Looking around, he sat down on the bed and wiggled his ass. The innards responded with the muffled crack of a spring. The room was saturated with tobacco smoke. A little toy man hung on the cord of the cheapo chandelier, which had three different-colored shades.

Unbuttoning his coat and wearily propping his elbows on his legs, he stared vacantly at the floor. In principle, it probably wasn’t such a bad thing that he was locked in. He hadn’t been able to take the loneliness in the first hours and days after completing his other contracts, and after resting up, he’d probably have headed out to find himself some excitement. Especially since yesterday’s bloodbath on Tverskaya hadn’t even been a contract but—no getting around it—an act of extreme violence by him, Arkasha Veltsev, his own idea, his own justice, and his own insanity: six corpses, two of whom were—if you don’t get bogged down in details about how the scene of the crime was a nightclub closed to mere mortals—“innocent bystanders.”

“This is a mouse trap. And I’m the cheese.”

Mechanically, Veltsev reached for the gun in his underarm holster and turned to face the voice. In a partition behind the door, her legs gathered up into a shabby armchair, sat a girl of eighteen or twenty wearing a flowered Uzbek robe and a skullcap tilted over one ear. Her thickly painted mouth and eyebrows made her look older. She was trying to hide her smile, tickled she’d been able to hide her presence so simply all this time, and she rolled an unlit cigarette in her fingers. Veltsev dropped his arm and straightened his coat hem.

“Who are you?”

Lighting up, the girl released a stream of smoke upward.

“Lana,” she answered in a tone that said she was surprised someone might not know. “I’m telling you—a free offer.”

Veltsev pulled off his cap and scratched his head. “That’s why the old woman locked the door. I didn’t say that—”

“Remember the tale of Buratino?” the girl interrupted him. “The one with the cauldron? The cauldron’s over there. Freedom’s here.”

“What cauldron’s that?”

“What do you picture when you feel like a vacation?”

“Nothing.”

“That’s not true. You picture something.” Squinting dreamily, Lana pushed her skullcap forward and threw her head back with a jutting chin. “Palm trees. The ocean. Cocktails down the hatch. Slut city. Happy now?” She nodded at the window. “We’re not doing so well with sluts, of course. It’s potluck, as they say. But freedom—up the wazoo. What’s your name?”

“Listen,” Veltsev sighed, “I just needed a place to crash.”

“Ah-hah,” Lana answered vaguely. “Just crashing.” Tapping her ash into the saucer under her chair, she played with the cigarette as if she were finishing telling herself something.

“A place to sleep,” Veltsev corrected himself.

“Yesterday”—she smiled—“this old guy, you know what he asked me to do?”

“What?”

“Piss on his privates.”

“And?”

“And nothing. I sprayed his balls and that was it. To each his own, as they say.”

Veltsev glanced at his watch. “What else do they ask for?”

Lana scratched her sweet knee, which was poking out from under her robe, with her elbow. “Marriage!” She aimed her cigarette at him. “Haven’t you heard that prostitutes make the most faithful wives?”

Veltsev lay down. The little man hanging from the chandelier bobbed in front of his face.

“I heard something else.”

“What?”

“That wives are faithful prostitutes.”

Lana burst out laughing. “Are you married or something?”

“No.”

“A virgin?”

He ran the back of his head over the brush-stiff pile of rug. “Listen, lay off.”

Lana lowered her voice: “But I am.”

“What?”

“Well, a virgin.”

Veltsev sighed. “Naturally.”

“No, honestly!” The chair creaked under Lana. “Don’t believe me? Last month I got sewn back up. I got engaged to an Uzbek, a cotton trader, while he was waiting for the train with his shipment. He fell in love, he said, over the moon. He promised me a car. Only according to our custom, he says, you have to get the bed bloody the first night. To be blunt, he gave me a hundred bucks for plastic surgery.”

“So you mean you want to get back at it?” Veltsev picked at the rug with his finger.

“No, why?” Lana seemed genuinely surprised.

“What do you mean, why?” Veltsev didn’t understand.

Lana didn’t say anything.

“Sorry.”

“Basically, my Sharfik didn’t wait around for his train. My nice new fiancé got iced. They fished him out over there, from the Yauza, past the cemetery.”

“I’m sorry.”

“That’s all right.” She took a long drag. “Everyone’s got their own craziness. Sharfik wanted to move his loot here because he got into some shit. But that’s like jumping from a train after flies. Can you imagine? You throw away everything you have—every last thing—and get out at the first stop.”

“And?” Veltsev propped himself up on one elbow.

“And, well, that’s it, all done.” Lana crushed her cigarette butt in the saucer, lowered her legs from the chair, went out into the front hall, and came back with a photograph, which she tossed down next to him on the bed.

In the crumpled glossy snapshot Veltsev saw a smiling Southern face with a unibrow. The photo had been taken with a flash, close-up, practically point-blank. The face had come out fuzzy, overlit; but above and behind him the little man hanging from the chandelier was etched down to the last detail. On the back of the photo, carefully, like a monogram, a capital III had been written with a felt-tip pen. Veltsev spun the photo in his fingers, tossed it aside, sat down on the edge of the bed, and ran his fist across his forehead.

“What’s up with you?” Lana asked.

Slowly, not quite realizing what he was doing, he got out his wallet, opened it, and looked at its velvety layered insides.

“What’s up with you?” Lana repeated, coming closer.

Veltsev put his wallet away and stared at the floor again. The photograph had reminded him of something important that he’d lost sight of and burned the pit of his stomach, but nothing more specific, so that the next instant he couldn’t even say what exactly had made itself felt—a thing, a memory, a presentiment … ?

Lana picked up the photo, blew on it, and stuck it in the glass of the sideboard.

“Want some tea?” she asked, standing in the door. “Or maybe …”

Veltsev lay down again. “You do your thing there for now.

Turn off the light. I have to … just …”

“Crash, I know,” Lana finished for him, slapped the light switch, and shut herself up in the kitchen.

Collapsing on one elbow, Veltsev lit up and stretched out again. He held the cigarette in an outstretched hand, so the ashes would fall on the floor, and with the other fiddled with his lighter. Soon, he heard an amused muffled voice from the kitchen; Lana was talking on the phone. Veltsev tried to remember the girl’s clumsily made-up face, but instead he envisioned her sweet knee poking out from her robe.

A long time ago, about three years before, he’d come across an article on the Internet which tried to prove that a man’s disposition toward murder and women had their source in the same neurosis—which one exactly, Veltsev never did figure out, though he read the article twice. He was grateful to the author not for his murky verbiage but for the fact that a connection between his inclination for murder and his attraction to women had at least been given some kind of acknowledgment. That is, what he had previously considered something unique to him and had thought of as shameful, like a wet dream, had instantly stopped being either unique or unseemly. After his first contract, he languished a full day, sleepless, and then confessed at the Rozhdestvensky monastery. This act had no consequences for his soul’s salvation, but it had plenty of material results. On the way back from the monastery Veltsev fell asleep at the wheel and rolled his car. His first wife was a medical student who happened to be starting her residency that day at the Sklif. More in the dorm than the Sklif ER, she got Veltsev back on his feet. The next morning it was as if he’d woken up in a new world, and just one week later—with a light heart and even, really, a sense of selfless beneficence—he shot the drunk from Tula who’d been pestering her. He and Oksana got on like a house on fire for two and a half years, and Veltsev called what he brought home as his supposed pay as a personnel inspector for a private security agency their “family income.” Sex (not with any woman, of course, but with the one he considered his) was better than any confession at washing away his sins. When he was with his woman, he was restored body and soul, and he saw every embrace as the birth of a wonderful new life, a hundred times better than his own and a thousand times better than the ones he took away. For this reason he thought Bonnie and Clyde farfetched. Sexual attraction could not be any great help for heroes in a fight, unless they were homosexuals. And the only justification for a film like Natural Born Killers was that toward the end the bloodthirsty characters turned into loving parents, reborn in their children. He imagined himself and Oksana as loving parents just like that—until the Lord God started bothering her with telephone calls (on the basis of her rich ER practice probably). God always called in Veltsev’s presence. He talked a lot, didn’t answer questions, and before hanging up started wheezing into the receiver. “It’s awful,” his wife admitted guiltily. “I can hear perfectly but can’t make heads or tails of it.” In the six months that passed between the first call and that memorable (for Veltsev) night when the Lord decided to speak through Oksana and she was carted off with seizures to the Kanatchikovaya psych ward, she was able to get the full gist of only two divine revelations: “Everything will be jaga-jaga” and “Boys bloody in the eyes.”

His second marriage, the marriage of Veltsev and Dasha, who did not love him, lasted longer, strangely enough, nearly four years, but fell apart overnight—flew apart in sprays of blood yesterday, at dawn, when, tipped off by an anonymous text message, Veltsev shot the traitor, her lover and his “employer,” Mityai, both of Mityai’s gorillas, Repa and Jack, and the couple sitting on the far side of the screen behind their table. Veltsev had had a bad feeling about this in the fall when he came back from a business trip to St. Petersburg. Dasha, previously willful and hot-tempered, had suddenly softened and become compliant and pleasant. The change in her behavior could have been considered a good sign had it not been simultaneously a sign of infidelity, which destroyed the only thing that tied Veltsev to his wife—the all-renewing and all-forgiving quality of their intimacy. It was amazing, but up until yesterday’s disaster he had laid the blame for the fact that he had ceased to perceive Dasha as his woman not on her but on himself, and had even contemplated, cravenly, divorce. More than twenty-four hours had passed since the slaughter at the club, and he still couldn’t shake the feeling that he’d started to breathe an empty air that was ripping him up inside, like a deepwater fish tossed on shore.

“Don’t hide. I can see you,” he sighed, crushing out his butt on the windowsill. “Come on out.”

The kitchen door, which had been opened just a crack so she could peek through, was flung open, and Lana walked right up to Veltsev. She wasn’t wearing the skullcap anymore and the clown makeup had been wiped clean, and in the thick shadow between the freely swinging sides of her untied robe he saw white, not of her clinging panties but her naked body. Slipping his hand under the robe, Veltsev felt her warm skin, which his touch covered in goose bumps. Lana leaned into him.

“Have you decided to tempt me?” Veltsev asked.

“I misled you,” she said.

“About what?”

“I … well, I’m not, I didn’t have plastic surgery.”

“So?”

Her belly tensed under his fingers. “You won’t laugh?”

Veltsev coughed thoughtfully. “Wait … You, that is, you mean you really are a virgin?”

Lana covered his hand with hers.

“Would you like to check?”

He didn’t say anything but neither did he take his hand away. Lana froze and stared at him, as if waiting for him to blink. Veltsev held her gaze, but the second the girl touched his zipper, he grabbed her wrist. Lana’s arm was so thin and frail he figured he was hurting her, though she didn’t think to stop him, let alone take offense. So, with one hand, she opened his fly, jerked his pants down over his hips, pulled down his underpants, took his prick, and stroked it, spellbound. For a minute, maybe more, they didn’t move, coalesced in a silent scene. Lana studied and fingered his quickly swelling manhood, and Veltsev, not thinking anything, kept holding her arm. Then she climbed on the bed and kneeled so that she was squeezing him between her thighs. The movements of her fingers, up until now cautious and even fearful, became brusquer by increments. Carried away, she began entertaining herself with the sensitivity of his flesh, as if it were a toy, and didn’t seem to notice when she scratched the tip with her nail. Gasping from pain, Veltsev crushed her small breast. “Now you …” she said, and let him go. Squeezing the burning spot with one hand, Veltsev caressed Lana with the other—just to distract her. “Not like that,” she sighed with annoyance. She hopped down and went to the sideboard and started digging around. Taking advantage of the break, Veltsev took his gun out of his holster, put it into his coat pocket, and slipped out of his heavy shirt. Lana came back with a jar of a fragrant ointment and mounted him again. With the cordiality of a hostess, generously, she rubbed it on his prick, as if it were a sandwich, guided it between her legs, and peered at Veltsev. He lingered a moment and didn’t press hard. Lana shrugged off her robe and tossed it aside. Seeing she was hurt and scared, Veltsev kept pressing—not leaning into her but pulling her toward him by the hips—softly, slowly, with the feeling that something awful was about to happen. But it didn’t, and Lana made no sound. It took a moment for Veltsev to realize he was completely inside her. Lana lifted and dropped back down, tilting her pelvis, either bracing herself or getting used to the pain, after which she renewed her cautious vertical movements. She came three times with convulsive shudders; each time Veltsev thought that was the end of it, but then Lana would start moving again.

At last she dug both hands into Veltsev, grabbed a fistful of undershirt and skin on his chest, and, as if making up for something she’d missed, began moving erratically, speeding up with each thrust, so powerfully and boldly the glass in the sideboard started rattling and dust rose from the rug. Holding her by the waist, Veltsev looked stupidly at her swinging breasts, the tips of her braids sticking to her clavicles, and her flushed face. The little man hanging from the chandelier was revolving slowly over her head. Gasping, Lana would grab Veltsev’s shoulders and then, as if trying to get away from him, retreat a little. To each of her exhales, which coincided with a dull, squelching thrust to his groin, a moan was now added, and she nearly broke into sobs. Veltsev felt like he was starting to suffocate, like a shivering heat was rising from his knees to his belly. Under the rug the bedsprings sang and creaked, and the metallic scream for some reason made him think of the couple who took the bullets in the club. “Damn, damn, damn,” he started intoning in time with Lana’s furious galloping, and he tried to move too, as much as he could. They came almost simultaneously: Veltsev with a quiet moan, crushing her hips; Lana absolutely silently, shuddering finely and collapsing on him facedown, as if she’d been shot.

After catching his breath he kissed her burning temple, moved her closer to the head of the bed, grabbed his crumpled coat, and locked himself in the bathroom. His bruised groin was copiously stained with blood and gave off the stunning aroma of a blooming flowerbed. The instant Veltsev approached the mirror it fogged up. He leaned his forehead against the foggy glass. Somewhere in the wall, a water pipe was rattling. There was a child’s toothbrush in the drinking glass on the shelf under the mirror. Veltsev glanced at his watch but stopped being able to see it before he could figure out what time it was. Like his opened wallet, the dial seemed to offer itself as a reminder of something important and forgotten. He ran his hand hard across his head, looked up and from side to side, and couldn’t remember anything. Thinking he might yet find some hint, he rummaged through his coat pockets, took out his gun, ejected the magazine into his hand, and put it back in the grip. That after yesterday there were just three cartridges left, he already knew. “Bang bang,” he said to his emerging reflection, set the Beretta where he could easily reach it from the bathtub, and crawled into the shower.

Lana maybe? it occurred to him as he was soaping up his groin.

Standing stock-still, he looked up at the ceiling again, shrugged, and kept washing. Whether or not Lana was his woman he couldn’t yet say, of course. Just as he couldn’t say whether she’d been a virgin. On the other hand, as soon as he had washed off her blood, he realized something he hadn’t been able to put in words before: in his preferences he was guided less by the obvious pluses of his partners’ youth—if they couldn’t be his daughters, they were still a lot younger than he was—than by the fact that their age gave him—childless in deference to his profession—the illusion of a full-fledged family. His women were also his children. Not daring to acquire any real descendants, he acquired them in his imagination, which lent their bodily intimacy the characteristics of both conception and birth. His woman was like an improved Eve, not simply a resident but the guardian of paradise, holding the forbidden fruit in one hand and in the other the serpent tempter—by the throat.

Veltsev moved his head out from under the shower stream and listened: through the wall he heard a rumbling, first soft, then louder. He’d been hearing this rumbling for a while and hadn’t paid it any mind, thinking it was the pipe rattling, but once he turned off the water he realized the din was coming from the apartment and it was a fight, not the plumbing. Muffled blows and shuffling were interspersed with Lana’s cries and a man’s voice choking from fury. While Veltsev was drying off and putting his clothes back on, the point of the tussle became clear to him in general outline. The man, who spoke with a strong Asian accent, was demanding information from Lana about Sharfik (doubtless the smiling guy in the photograph) and about some major debt. “If he doesn’t come up with it, I’m coming for him!” the man yelled hoarsely. “He’s a dead man! Understand? A dead man! And that guy in the bathroom—does he know? Ask him.”

“Idiot!” Lana replied, sobbing. “That’s the renter. I told you.”

Dressed now, Veltsev attached the silencer to his Beretta, slipped a cartridge into its chamber, carefully, held his thumb down on the safety, touched the trigger, stuck the gun in his holster, flung the door open, and came out of the bathroom.

Lana, wrapped in her robe, was sitting on the bed holding her broken nose. Not only her face but her arms above her wrists and her neck as well were splattered with blood. The imprint of a slap burned on her cheek. Opposite her, his arms akimbo and legs spread, stood her attacker, a strapping, athletically built Uzbek wearing a sheepskin coat sprinkled with melting snow and a large Kalmyk fur cap, earflaps down. A small scar crossed the uninvited guest’s mouth on a slant from nose to chin, beads dangled from his fist, and the merest edge of his knife’s carved hilt stuck out of his fur-trimmed right boot top. Birds of a feather, Veltsev thought. Then: Who the hell let this guy in?

“Who are you?” the Uzbek breathed out at Veltsev, turning toward him slowly, as if he were going to kick him.

Veltsev peered at a very still Lana.

“Go get washed, please,” he told her.

She rose silently; splashing him with the scent of her floral cream, she proceeded to the bathroom. The bolt clicked in the door. Veltsev collected the photograph from the sideboard glass and held it out to the Uzbek.

“I’m here because of him too.”

“What?” The Uzbek grabbed the snapshot and stared at it vacantly, as if it were blank. “Because of what?”

“I know where the money is,” Veltsev explained. “You came for the money, right? So did I. Let’s go.”

The Uzbek threw the photograph at his feet and swung his beads. “Where?”

Veltsev backed up and glanced into the front hall: a key with electrical tape wrapped around the handle was jutting out of the keyhole. “To get the money. I’m telling you. It’s close by.”

The area around the front of the house was spectral, tinted by the light from the windows. Big fat snowflakes were falling from the sky. The trees, the cars, the garages—everything with the exception of the Land Cruiser blocking the alley—was covered in a layer of white. The newly fallen snow creaked underfoot. Veltsev lit up, peered around as he was walking, and nodded at the Uzbek waiting in the lobby. Passing down the ravine between the cemetery fences and the business center, they descended to the Yauza. Not wide, ten meters or so, the channel appeared narrower than it actually was because of the ice frozen along its banks. Veltsev touched the thin crust with his boot tip, as if he were searching for something, took a few steps up and downstream. Saying not a word, the Uzbek shone the flashlight for him. “Here,” Veltsev said at last, pointing at random at the black water. “Only we need something to retrieve it with.” The Uzbek had come closer to the water too, and was regarding it warily. He was holding the light in his left hand, and the end of his knife hilt peeked out of his closed right hand. “We need something to retrieve it with,” Veltsev repeated, and walked over to the reeds on the riverbank. Pulling his gun out of the holster, he took a quick look around. Not far away, on the river, outside the circle of light, he heard the quacking of ducks, and down the opposite bank fireworks were chirring and exploding.

In the air, thick with snow, the shot clanged softly, as if getting stuck in it. The bullet hit the Uzbek at the very base of his neck, knocking out of his cap a puff of what was either steam or dust. The Uzbek dropped the flashlight, sat down briefly, and fell face-first into the water. After rifling the dead man’s pockets, Veltsev took his car keys and shoved the body with his feet farther into the water, where the current would quickly bear him away. The earflaps of his fur cap, which was still smoking from the shot, floated in the water. A double ribbon of blood danced on the bottom in the flashlight’s tiny glow.

The snowfall had been heavy enough that Veltsev didn’t find his own tracks on the way back. On the other hand, he did find a handprint on the driver’s door of the SUV, which was parked in the middle of the road. “Asshole.” Veltsev made quick work of searching the hash- and sheepskin-impregnated glove compartment, drove the car to the cemetery gate, and abandoned it there on the shoulder of the road. On the way the car phone rang twice, and both times he could barely restrain himself from answering with some graveyard humor.

When Lana found out what had happened, she clutched her head with both hands, dropped into the armchair feet first, and said, “That’s it. I’m a dead man too. “

“Why’s that?” Veltsev asked.

“He’d been on the phone arranging … a meet-up with his pals near the front door.”

“A meet-up—for when?”

Lana looked at the cuckoo clock. “Eleven-thirty. In an hour, I guess.” Still holding her head she turned toward Veltsev. “Listen, couldn’t you have asked me what was going on? Before you—”

“Do you have the 300,000 he was talking about?” Veltsev interrupted her.

“Where would I get that?” Lana’s eyebrows shot up. “I’ve got five hundred rubles till Wednesday.”

“And this Sharfik of yours—do you know where he is?”

“I told you where.”

Veltsev pulled his sleeve back over his watch. “In that case, calm down. They didn’t come for the money today.”

Lana dropped her arms. “What did they come for?”

“You.”

“Why?”

“He was going to have himself a horror flick. Do you have somewhere to go?”

“No.”

“I can put you up in a hotel for a little while.”

“I can’t.”

“Why not?”

“I don’t have my passport.”

“Why not?”

“Baba Agafia has it.”

“So?”

“So she won’t give it back.”

Veltsev wiped his face, which was still wet from snow. “Damn. I can’t stay here long.”

Lana sniffed her swollen nose. “I’m not keeping you.”

Grinning, he gave her a close, appraising look. “That’s not likely to win you a star for heroism.”

Hugging her knees, Lana looked blindly ahead and fiddled with her toes. “Fine with me. We’ve got a whole cemetery full of heroes right here.”

Veltsev took the magazine out of the gun, brought it up to his eyes like a thermometer, and jammed the weapon back in the holster. “I’m asking you for the last time. Will you come with me?”

She didn’t answer, in fact she seemed to have stopped hearing him altogether. Veltsev took his wet cap off the shelf in the front hall, replaced it with three thousand-ruble bills, took one more look at Lana, and pushed the door open with his fist.

It was snowing a little less, but the wind had picked up. In the courtyard the wind beat only at the treetops, but as soon as Veltsev came out in the open it took his breath away. He was walking back to the subway, heading toward Menzhinsky Street, following the same route he’d taken an hour and ten minutes before—down the shoulder of the road between river and cemetery. “Pigheaded fool,” he said aloud through clenched teeth, squinting at the cutting snow. He raged less at Lana than at himself for imagining god knows what about her. Waiting for the Uzbek’s buddies to show up was sure suicide, and Veltsev had no idea where to get ahold of more rounds now. He’d cut off access to his home arsenal yesterday, and there was too much risk involved in going to his old suppliers. There was still one other Mityai gunman left, of course, Kirila the Kalmyk. Veltsev had beaten off a band of skinheads for him the year before last and ever since had been practically a second father to him. After what happened yesterday, however, when Kirila was left completely out of the loop, even his filial feelings might have changed; furthermore, contacting him now presented a purely technical problem. Veltsev had smashed the SIM card from his own telephone and thrown it out the day before as he left the club, and a call from Lana’s apartment could easily be traced. After taking a few shaky steps, Veltsev stood up and brushed the snow from his eyelashes. The thought of the phone in the Uzbek’s Land Cruiser came to him the second before he noticed the SUV there in front of him, right where he’d abandoned it.

Kirila the Kalmyk answered the moment the call went through.

“Yeah.”

“Got the number?” Veltsev said instead of a greeting.

“Yeah,” Kirila replied after a slight hesitation.

“Call back from a pay phone. Only not from your building or wherever you are.” Veltsev hung up, started the engine, adjusted the rearview mirror with a finger, and examined himself carefully. Weirdo psycho.

A transparent sticker with Arabic lettering bubbled up in the corner of the mirror. Veltsev was about to scratch it off when the phone rang. He picked up.

“Hello.”

The acute, spacious silence of the ether pulsed in the receiver. Veltsev called the incoming number—they were calling from a cell phone. Calling the Uzbek, that is.

“Hell on the line,” Veltsev said and he waited a little, ended the call, and looked in the mirror again. “Warm already.”

When Kirila called, his voice was cracking from strain. “Everyone got blown away. What were you thinking? The committee’s mopping up both the crooks and the cops. You know who Mityai was working for. They’ve got three mil on you.”

“Already know how you’ll spend it?” Veltsev asked.

Kirila said nothing, breathing loudly through his nose.

“Sorry,” Veltsev sighed. “Here’s what’s up. I need a couple of clips for my Beretta—bad. Forty minutes tops. Bring them?”

“Where?”

“Babushkinskaya. When you turn off Menzhinsky onto Olonetsky, there’s this business center. Right behind the cemetery. Can you make it?”

“I’ll try.”

Veltsev tossed the phone on the seat, turned the wheel from side to side, and, without putting the vehicle in gear, hit the pedal a few times, so abruptly and hard that the heavy vehicle rocked.

Half an hour later, Kirila’s Cayenne, plastered with snow, rolled into the vacant parking lot in front of the business center fence. Veltsev, who had left the Land Cruiser in back of the apartment building, was waiting behind the trees between the road and the river. Once he was convinced that Kirila had come alone and hadn’t brought a tail, he got in the car with him. The smell of alcohol struck him immediately.

“Batya”—the Kalmyk called him “Father” even though he was just ten years younger—“I respect you!” The man broke out in a smile, holding out his right hand to Veltsev and three full magazines in his left.

Veltsev shook the fighter’s rock-hard hand, took the magazines, and reloaded his gun. “What do you respect me for, Kila-Kirila?”

“Oh, just in general.” Kalmyk shook his shoulders. “If Mityai had done the same to me, with my Svetka … I don’t know. I wouldn’t have had the nerve. Maybe if I was high.”

Veltsev holstered his gun, distributed the extra magazines in his pockets, straightened his clothes, and stared into Kirila’s eyes. “Well, how’s it going? Many gunning for the three mil?”

“I don’t know.” Kirila sobered up instantly. “I haven’t seen anybody today. Everyone’s crazy angry, of course—at you and at Mityai. The committee’s after him for treason. You know all about it.”

“Right.” Veltsev glanced at his watch and reached for the door. “Gotta go.”

“Listen!” Kalmyk barked. “Maybe I should come along.”

“No, Kila.” Veltsev jumped down into the snow. “You’ve helped enough as it is.” Slamming the door, he headed for the alley behind the parking lot.

“Well, I’ll hang out here another five minutes anyway!” Kirila shouted after him.

Veltsev waved him off in silence.

The storm was picking up. Snow was eddying in the lane and from time to time the wind gusted so hard it made his ears ring. A few meters before the corner, between the rear and front façades of the apartment building, Veltsev heard a woman’s anguished cries coming from the courtyard. He could make out the blue glow of a flashing light. His gun at the ready, Veltsev peeked around the wall. Where the Uzbek’s Land Cruiser had recently been parked, Mityai’s empty Geländewagen sat idling in exhaust. The flashing light was poking up off the top of the armored car’s roof. Next to the car, on the narrow patch of ground between the alley and the door of the scorched lobby, Baba Agafia was trying to beat off Kostik, Mityai’s chief bodyguard, who was attempting to strong-arm her. “I’m not letting you in! I’m not letting you the hell in! Get out! Get out!” Baba Agafia rasped as if it were her last breath, and she tried to hit Kostik, windmilling like a swimmer. Mishanya Ryazanets was marking time behind Kostik. A little farther off, in a side alley, wiping his frozen mustache with his wrist, a thug Veltsev didn’t know wearing a cashmere coat and a tall fur cap was pacing back and forth, a lit cigarette in one hand and a walkie-talkie crackling in the other. Veltsev stepped back behind the corner and pressed himself to the wall.

Thank you so much, Kila-Kirila.

He had to make a decision, but before he could think of anything he saw Double Dima—the identical twin of Jack, who had died yesterday with Mityai—coming around the opposite corner of the building, from around back. Cursing, Dima was zipping his fly as he walked and stamping his feet from the cold. A walkie-talkie antenna was poking out of the pocket of his sport coat, and his legs were caked with snow up to the knees. Veltsev ran toward him with his gun in his outstretched arm, so that by the time Dima finished with his fly and looked up, his forehead nearly ran into the Beretta’s silencer.

“Back,” Veltsev commanded, advancing. “Nice and easy.”

Dima, dumbstruck, started backing up submissively. Around the corner, in the front garden, Veltsev made him kneel in the snow and noticed a line of tracks near the wall.

“Have you been peeking in windows, you bad boy?”

Dima vaguely waved his raised hands. His bulletproof vest bulged out between the lapels of his open jacket.

“Give me the walkie-talkie,” Veltsev said.

Dima fumbled in his pocket and handed it over.

“Easy,” Veltsev said, “nice and easy. Tell them you see me and can take me out through the window. Repeat it.”

“I can see … him through the window, I can take him out.”

“Do it.”

Dima spoke the words into the walkie-talkie, and as soon as he heard the reply—“One sec, we’re there”—Veltsev shot him right between the eyes. Shuddering as if gripped by a powerful chill, Dima collapsed onto his side and stretched out his legs. The snow under his head sank quickly and turned dark. Riveted by the sight of blood, Veltsev recalled how he’d shot Jack yesterday the same way, in the head; he spat and made a cross over his numb chest. Double Jack, who you could only distinguish from his brother by the mole over his eyebrow, was lying in front of him. Dima had been guarding Mityai yesterday. “If he twitches, whack him, don’t wait,” cooed the walkie-talkie, which had fallen into the snow. Veltsev picked it up and was about to say something but turned it off instead and dropped it by the body. Kneading his numb fingers, he stole a glance around the corner. First to appear on the path along the rear wall was Kostik, followed by Mishanya wielding his gun, and then the guy in the cashmere coat, hanging back like a coward. “Bang bang bang,” Veltsev whispered.

They dropped, one after the other, no sound, just like that, all three, like a row of dominoes. Kostik and Mishanya died before they hit the ground—the former got a bullet in the eye and the latter bcv fb’s nose was obliterated—but the thug in the coat, after he crashed forward, suddenly answered fire. Stumbling, Veltsev dropped back around the corner. He tried to count the shots, but immediately realized that was impossible. He probably wasn’t firing an ordinary silenced piece but a gun with noiseless ammo, which meant you could only distinguish a shot after the bullets had ricocheted off something. Regardless, there was no time to waste. The thug could call in reinforcements over his walkie-talkie at any second. Veltsev caught his breath, emerged from his cover again, and, moving along the wall, started shooting at the mustached man’s twitching back. He held the trigger down until he’d emptied what was left in his magazine, all eleven cartridges.

Even though his face had blossomed like an onion and was smoking like a pot, the thug nonetheless kept squeezing his gun, which had its safety engaged. Propping one elbow on the ground, he aimed up at someone in front of him. When his arm dropped, sapped, Veltsev picked the gun up delicately with two fingers.

It was a silent, six-round Vul, a special make for special agents like this. Before this Veltsev had only seen one in pictures. You couldn’t get the gun or ammo for it on the black market for any amount of money. Now, after firing, the open chamber didn’t even smell of powder. Actually, examining his trophy, Veltsev wasn’t thinking about its unique characteristics anymore but about how he no longer needed to search the dead man for documents because his identity was obvious. An agent of the special services—whether GRU or FSB was irrelevant—had just given up the ghost.

After dragging the bodies around the corner and stacking them next to Double Jack, he drove the Geländewagen on, into the rear yard, and parked it next to the Land Cruiser. The blizzard was not abating. Veltsev tried to warm himself for a couple of minutes behind the wheel. Even though he was soaked with sweat from dealing with the bodies, he was still chilled to the bone. “We’re rolling, rolling, rolling,” he intoned, holding his palms over the humming heating vents. He stared at the thug’s loaded gun in front of him.

The Uzbek’s gang showed up at Lana’s entrance like clockwork, at exactly 11:30. Three men came out of their SUV, which differed from the Land Cruiser parked out back only by its license number. Veltsev was waiting for them to go through the door, but after conferencing at the lobby threshold, the trio returned to the car. Veltsev blinked away his frost-induced tears. There was a weak crimson glow spreading behind the Land Cruiser—probably from the taillights, but broad enough that it lit up the whole section of the apartment building spread out behind the car, as well as the buildings in the rear of the courtyard, about 150 meters away.

When it became clear to him that the SUV was headed down the track blazed by the Geländewagen around the building, the Land Cruiser had already driven into the rear courtyard, rocking over the potholes. Veltsev removed his gun from its holster. “Rolling, rolling, rolling …”

After hurrying to the abandoned cars, the trio moved around them in single file, and then—obviously following Veltsev’s tracks—came upon the bodies heaped in the front garden. Veltsev, whose teeth were now chattering from the cold, leaned his shoulder into the edge of the back wall. The blizzard was seething all around, but a silence fell over the front garden such that when mustache guy’s walkie-talkie started talking in the snowdrift behind it—“Five, where’d you go? Over”—Veltsev nearly pulled the trigger. Disjointedly, reluctantly almost, the trio turned toward the sound. Seeing their vacant young faces animated by death, he shot them calmly and methodically, like targets at a shooting range. Only the gunman at the far right had time to throw up his arm before falling onto the powdered bodies. “Five, are you asleep?” he heard behind him.

Veltsev rested his hands on his straight legs as he bent over. He was struck by a chill. “I think that’s enough for today,” he muttered, glancing at the front garden. The trio’s car was parked with the engine running and its bulk lit up, and once again he caught a glimpse of a reddish glow behind the SUV, only now its source definitely wasn’t the taillights but something beyond the cemetery fence. The trees and flying snow on that side were tinted by a hazy crimson. Puzzled, he walked over to the Land Cruiser, opened the door, and looked inside. Nothing special. The same smell as in the Uzbek’s car, half sheepskin, half hash. A sticker with Arab lettering on the rearview mirror. A phone. A cigarette burn on the driver’s seat. Veltsev was about to slam the door shut, but he froze when he noticed a fresh drop of blood next to the melted hole in the seat. Stepping back, he peered down at his feet and saw something tiny break off into the snow from the Beretta’s silencer. He raised the weapon in front of him: the left side of the gun, and the tips of his right fingers as well, had obviously been dragged through blood. Frosted oily traces had caked across his coat’s lower lapel. On the upper lapel, to the side of the lower button loop, gaped a small hole. Veltsev opened his coat. The silk lining on the left side, some of his sweater below his chest, the edge of the holster that touched his shirt, and his pants down to the knees—all of it was wet and steaming with blood. The bullet had penetrated his waistband and entered his belly above his pelvis, a little lower and to the left of his navel; judging from the fact that his waist was still dry, it had landed in his abdominal cavity. “The Vul,” Veltsev whispered, and then closed his coat. “Nice and easy …”

He used the sterile wipes from the car’s first aid kit to plug the wound, but he didn’t try to treat it with iodine for fear of passing out from the pain. He chewed a few painkillers and tried to calculate how much time had passed since he’d taken the bullet; in any event he was sure to go into shock soon and wasn’t going to last long on the capsule he’d just swallowed. He thought a moment and then dialed the Kalmyk’s number.

“Hello!” Kirila shouted, turning down his loud music.

“Where are you?” Veltsev asked.

The music stopped. “Still here. Why?”

“Do you have Promedol with you?”

“As usual. Why?”

“Wait. I’ll be right there.

“If you’re not a fool, Veltsev thought as he made his way through the deep snow to the alley, you’ll drive away. Or shoot first. If you are a fool … Actually, the human heart is always a mystery. Everyone saves himself in his own way.

The Cayenne was parked in the same place by the business center fence. Using his gun to press the plug to his wound, Veltsev climbed into the backseat. Kirila half-turned and looked silently at his bloody clothes. When Veltsev held out his hand between the seats, Kirila quickly opened the army first aid kit in front of him.

Removing the cap with his teeth, Veltsev jabbed a needle into his belly through his pants, slowly pressed on the plunger, and spat the cap on the floor.

“Where’d you get that?” Kirila asked.

Panting, Veltsev set the empty syringe aside. “It’s nothing. I’ll live to see my wedding day.”

“The butcher’s going to weep over you.” Half-rising, Kirila picked up the syringe and put it back in the kit. The handle of a Walther flashed between the lapels of his jacket. “Let’s go, eh?”

“Not just yet.” Veltsev shook his head. “I have something else … I thought you wanted to help.”

“Yeah.” Kirila straightened up. “Sure. What?”

“I shot a guy here on the Yauza. I have to go clean it up. Will you help?”

“Let’s go, Batya. You should’ve said so first.”

“Godspeed then.” Veltsev nodded.

The current had not taken the Uzbek’s body far at all, a couple of meters, to a bend in the river where it must have caught on an underwater snag. Whistling, the Kalmyk stood on the bank and tested the ice with the tips of his boots. Veltsev pressed the plug over his coat with his left hand and cautiously freed his gun.

“We need something to retrieve him with,” Kirila said without turning around.

“No we don’t,” Veltsev answered, firing twice.

The bullets struck the Kalmyk with a boff right below the shoulder blade. Shaking his sloping, bearlike shoulders as if chilled, and shifting from one foot to the other, Kirila calmly peered back at Veltsev, lowered himself without hurrying, reached toward the water, and then just as smoothly lay down in it head first, as if it were a bed. Through all this the water didn’t so much as splash. “The butcher did cry,” Veltsev said, breathing heavily, and then he spat. “Three hundred thousand cried.”

Scooting behind the wheel of the Cayenne, he changed the sodden towels on his groin, wiped his fingers, and, looking at the dirty gun lying between the seats, remembered who he could go to for help. All his old working options connected with Mityai were obviously out. That left only two: head to the Sklif, or to the guy who was kicked out of the Sklif for drugs—Oksana’s classmate—who lived on Trubnaya. Let’s try the last first, Veltsev decided, and he started the engine. Trubnaya.

On the ice-packed road, the powerful SUV swerved from shoulder to shoulder; right in front of the exit onto Menzhinsky it took a turn that swung him around onto the median. Veltsev lifted his hand over the wheel and a tremendous shudder ran through it. His belly and left hip were numb, and a fever was rising from his groin to his chest that made his head swim. Veltsev tapped the SUV’s wheel with his nail. “Okay. Correction …”

Driving up to the apartment building at a snail’s pace, at the last minute he confused the gas pedal and brakes and slammed into the Geländewagen’s rear fender. Halfway between the front garden and the piled up cars, at the end of a bloodied rut, lay one of the trio’s gunmen, facedown. Veltsev had to step over him. He ran right into Lana by the lobby door. Gasping from fright, she backed off with her key extended like a weapon. Veltsev reached out his trembling open palm to her.

“It’s me.”

In the apartment she carefully sat him down on the bed, squatted next to him, peeked under his coat, buried her head in the sleeve of her pea coat, and started crying bitterly. “God, I … you … me …”

“I’m asking you for the last time,” Veltsev said, smiling in pain, “will you go away with me?” He freed his gun from under his coat and set it on the rug. “Or rather, will you drive?”

Lana looked at him skeptically. “Where? In what?”

“To see Dr. Doolittle. Can you drive?”

“Listen …” Swallowing her tears, she hugged him below the knees and gave him a gentle shake. “A medic lives right here in the next courtyard. He did an abortion at our house for Baba Agafia’s niece. Should we go see him?”

“Are you serious?” Veltsev frowned.

“Wait.” Jumping lightly to her feet, Lana kissed him on the lips and hurried into the kitchen, where Veltsev immediately heard the clicking of telephone buttons.

He took out his lighter and flicked it idly. Lana hung up with a clatter, came back, and sat down by him again.

“No answer.” Worried, she blew hard on the fist she’d brought to her mouth. “Let’s do this then. I’ll run over to his place, and if he’s home I’ll set it all up. If he’s not, we’ll go see your Doolittle. Can you hold on for a couple of minutes?”

Veltsev kept flicking the lighter and watching her silently. He heard but wasn’t listening to her. He was listening to himself, to the sensation that for some reason felt like a memory: right now he wanted to be with her more than any other women he’d ever been with. It seemed strange and at the same time simple, like the strawberry flavor of her lipstick.

She was saying something else, then she kissed him again, turned off the light, and ran into the front hall.

“Where are you going?” he asked with difficulty.

Lana spun around and turned the key over in her fist. “I told you.”

“Wait.” Veltsev tried to stand. “I’ll tag along.”

“Right,” she hedged, opening the door. “And if you check out, should I call an EMT? Or a hearse? Wait.” The door banged shut behind her and the lock clicked twice.

Veltsev lit up, leaned back on his elbows, put a cushion under his head, and lay down across the full length of the bed. The little man hanging from the chandelier swung in the smoke streams.

He woke himself up coughing.

A cobweb danced on the ceiling. Smoke from burning wool ate into his eyes and singed his throat. The cigarette had fallen from his fingers and set the rug pile on fire. Rubbing out the smoldering fibers with his sleeve, Veltsev glanced at his watch and shook his wrist, perplexed. He’d slept more than fifteen minutes. The plug had pulled away from the wound so that blood was seeping through not only his sweater but also the rug under his spread-out coat. Veltsev rose cautiously from the bed.

“Lana,” he called.

The reply was a ringing, rugged silence. Thinking his ears might be stopped up, he opened and closed his mouth. The floor rose and fell under his feet in big even waves. Propping himself up on the wall with one hand, Veltsev made his way out into the front hall. The door was still locked. He looked through the peephole, tugged at the bolt, opened and closed his mouth again, and listened. Somewhere far away, almost out of hearing range, in that rugged silence, he heard the gasping siren of an ambulance or the police. Suddenly the phone rang in the kitchen. Veltsev pushed away from the door but stopped half a step away. There was no second ring; the rugged silence had swallowed that up too.

He returned to the room and was about to lie down when the phone started wailing again, and again broke off after the first ring. Veltsev smeared the wallpaper with his blood as he hobbled to the kitchen. He could barely feel anything between his chest and knees, and it seemed like his legs were moving independently of his body, first lagging behind, then rushing ahead, which made it quite a trick to maintain his balance. The light was off in the kitchen, but the small room was illuminated by garlands of colored lights framing the window on the inside. The red light on the old telephone, below the dial, was shining. Sitting at the table, Veltsev picked up the receiver, brought it to his right ear, and held it with his shoulder. His left hand, stretching toward the dial, rested on the table. In the receiver he heard the nervous voices of Lana and Baba Agafia interrupting each other—the telephone was on an extension.

“… when I saw him I nearly pissed myself,” Lana rattled on, short of breath. “I thought, that’s it, he’s going to shoot me. My Phuket’s fucked. Can you imagine?”

“Oh, and about that card of his,” Baba Agafia chimed in, barely listening to her. “It fell out of his passport, but he didn’t notice. After I locked you in I found it in the snow, and when I got home I couldn’t believe it. Why go to a hotel, I thought, if you have a residency permit, and then, if you’ve already paid for the hotel, come all the way out here? Well, I’m no fool, so I went and turned on the television. And there—saints alive!—I saw his photograph and his name. And a number to call.” Baba Agafia sneezed loudly, with a chesty wheeze. “I nearly died.”

“And nice Farid, when he came over”—Lana spouted laughter—“after I called you I gave him a buzz right away and figured out about Sharfik’s debt … He was in the bathroom then … so I let that little fool Farid know”—she whispered wickedly—“and an hour and a half later he and Sharfik shoot it out.”

“You could have done it earlier, dummy,” Baba Agafia said reproachfully. “He and those downtown characters nearly fell into each others arms out there. Where are your brains?”

“Well, you shouldn’t have told such a massive lie then,” Lana snarled.

“Well, who knew they’d show up so fast, and in this blizzard?”

“Well, you just shouldn’t have. This guy wasn’t going anywhere.”

“How do you know?”

“Because he fell for me, that’s how. I don’t know why. But I can always sense what these lechers are up to. More than likely—it’s not all that complicated—it was my latest sew-up. Even I didn’t expect that this time. There was even a little blood.” Lana paused. “Yeah, by the way, what did you tell them, the ones who came in the Mercedes?”

“Oh, I don’t know.” Baba Agafia sniffed. “They didn’t just not have three hundred thousand, they didn’t have a kopek. I said I wouldn’t let them in. Over my dead body. Well, I could see they realized they were barking up the wrong tree. They walked away, whispered their secrets, and drove off. And now, just before you, they called again. They said they’d be right over. With the money. What about yours?”

“Who?”

“Oh, little Farid’s mujahideen.”

“That’s why I’m calling. This guy fixed everything, looks like, finished them off. Amazing.”

“How do you know?”

“None of their cells answer.”

“That means you’re free. And you have the money. You got away from me and little Farid.” Baba Agafia cackled, tickled. “Where are you hightailing it to?”

“Thailand, like I told you. Tomorrow there’ll be last-minute tickets on sale at this office I know. We think we can pull it off. Hey, dead man,” Lana said away from the phone, “what do you think, are we going to get those tickets?” Baba Agafia could hear a muffled male voice. “The dead man says we are.”

“All right, then,” Baba Agafia sighed. “You and I have talked too long. They might still call and the phone will be busy. Are you sure you locked that guy in?”

“You want me to go over and check to see if he’s already broken out?”

“Oh, I’m just afraid of him, the murderer. That look of his … makes my skin crawl.”

“Don’t be afraid,” Lana chuckled. “He’s the one whose soul is hanging by a thread. If he has one, of course.”

“Listen”—Baba Agafia’s voice dropped to a whisper—“what if he’s listening on the extension right now? Ugh, I didn’t think of that.”

“Not likely.” Lana chuckled again. “That’s the least of his problems. And even if he is listening … Hello,” she said in lower voice. “Hell on the line. I’ve got your number. God will call when—”

“Curse that tongue of yours, fool!” Baba Agafia shot back. “Fear God, you shameless girl!” There was a staccato chattering, after which short beeps started leaping in the ether.

As if expecting to hear something more, Veltsev held the receiver to his ear for a while longer, and then, sitting up straight, he lowered it carefully on the hook.

Rattling the chair, which he pushed in front of him like a walker, he headed over to the still smoking bed, took his passport out of his pocket, leafed through it, shook it out upside down, and tossed it aside. The rug seemed to be tilting to the left with the whole bed. It’s going to break where it’s weak, he thought, remembering how yesterday at the registration desk he’d slipped his hotel card between the pages of his passport and how today he’d searched for it in his wallet without knowing what he was looking for. A hot sea seemed to be overflowing its shores inside him. Smiling distractedly, like someone dangling his last cigarette in his fingers, he pictured Lana’s tear-stained face as she sat in front of him, and wondered at this image, at how it already existed on its own, as if it were something outside of him, which meant that the laughing voice he’d just heard in the ether no longer belonged to him. The cuckoo clock on the wall shuddered. A moment later, its chilled steel struck half past 12. The bird’s door didn’t open, it just shook; however, behind the toy mechanism Veltsev heard heavenly thunder. Someone was fiddling with the lock in the front door very carefully. Without looking he picked up his gun, cocked the trigger, and chuckled at the little man on the string: no one had called.





PART II




DEAD SOULS





FIELD OF A THOUSAND CORPSES





BY ALEXANDER ANUCHKIN

Elk Island





Translated by Marian Schwartz




Bogorodskoe Municipality,

Eastern Administrative District, 1996

When Nikolai Petrovich Voronov is sitting there like that and looking like that, expect trouble. Actually, if he’s looking some other way, you should still expect it. Nikolai Petrovich and trouble are twin brothers. Behind his back they call him Banderas, after the Spanish actor who conquered the world with his incredible muscularity and crazy machismo. When you look at the Hollywood Banderas, you can’t believe he actually exists. No one’s really like that. At least, that’s what they say. Me, I haven’t been to the movies for a long time. It’s expensive and pointless. Especially since a real homegrown Banderas is directly in front of me right now and I’m sitting here looking at him.

I realize that meeting a man like this on one’s life journey is tremendous good fortune. Don’t think I’ve got some alternative orientation or I don’t like women. God forbid. It’s just that Nikolai Petrovich is truly magnificent.

He’s forty or so, his hair’s the color of a crow’s wing (as they write in books), he combs it with a side part, but it’s too long. He’s been on duty for more than twenty-four hours but he’s wearing a snow-white shirt without a single wrinkle in it, and his collar, my god, his collar.

He has piercing eyes. Right now, as I write this, I can come up with only one comparison: a movie about sin city. The movies again, damnit, but that’s how it goes. Agent Voronov is top dog in the district of sin, the region of sin, the administrative division of sin. Strictly speaking, he’s sin and its nemesis all rolled into one.

He also has a mustache that droops down to the middle of his chin, deep wrinkles from his temples to the middle of his cheeks, and few teeth. Just the front ones, and those are smoked out, boozed out, brown. When he smiles—no more questions. A cop but an alcoholic. An alcoholic but he can stop. Can but won’t. He’ll kill. Without a second thought.

He lights up his third cigarette—he chain-smokes—in ten minutes, and through the poisonous haze of his Java Gold looks me right in the eye. His eyes are brown, but his look is icy, colder than the ocean. Our staring match has been going on for more than two months, ever since I came to work for him. That is, became the junior agent in the property crimes department of the Bogorodskoe Internal Affairs Department of the Eastern District Internal Affairs Department of the Moscow Main Internal Affairs Department. It all happened so suddenly, it wasn’t my doing, but that’s beside the point today, the subject of a whole separate novel. I’ve been a bad boy. I’m twenty-four and my very smallest tattoo, a huge kraken devouring the world, starts at my right ankle and ends at my left ear. I spent all the money I made seven years ago—when me and the boys drowned this drug dealer, a guy in our class, holding him by the leg in the Yauza—on this tat. That was when I suddenly developed my acute sense of righteousness: I was able to convince everyone that selling drugs was very bad. We forced that monster to promise not to do it anymore and then took his money before finishing him off. To teach him a lesson. Then there were the ladies. We swept the district clean of pimps, small-time profiteers, and fences, but at some point the guys stopped me. Actually, it was too late. I’d turned myself into one big walking sign, a yakuza out of a Takeshi Kitano nightmare. Twigs, leaves, branches, Celtic knot, and Japanese dragons—all the world’s evil spirits battled it out on my body for the right to a free millimeter of skin. What was going on a little bit deeper inside me—well, best not to even try to understand that.

I had only two options left, and I chose the wrong one. Now I’m an agent, a puny sergeant with a regulation cannon, in puny Bogorodskoe Internal Affairs, where druggies steal drills from construction sites, and druggies rape druggies, sometimes without even being clear about their victim’s gender, and druggies kill druggies to get themselves a little heroin—drugs aren’t just born under tram tracks after all. And tracks are the only thing (if you don’t count druggies, of course) we have an abundance of in our district.

Nikolai Petrovich is sitting in his white shirt across from me smoking his fourth cigarette. Today’s kind of like a holiday for him. After the obligatory five years, they made him a major. He’s on duty, but there hasn’t been anyone at all on Boitsovaya Street, where our department is, for the last few hours. Even the lunatics are lying low. Pretty soon we’ll go out and celebrate his stars. Fuck every living thing.

I light up my second and look at Voronov. He’s relaxing. A meter and a half from us, behind the door, the perps and vics—all jumbled together—await their fate on the sagging vinyl bench in the corridor. Soon Nikolai Petrovich, a king in his white shirt, with two nonregulation guns in his tan underarm holster, will start seeing them. He’ll punish and pardon.

But for now he’s sprinkling some nasty Nescafé some broken Hindu brought him from the market early this morning into his cup. Voronov sprinkles in one spoonful. Two. Three. He pauses for a moment over the fourth and then throws that in too, with the decisiveness of Alexander the Great. Oh, and seven lumps of sugar. A stream of boiling water, a dirty spoon, the first noisy swallow. The agent lights up again and leans back in his chair, which is worn down to the veneer. He closes his eyes, takes a drag, and releases the smoke. Then—with just his eyelids—he gives me the order: Go. I open the door for the first time that night.

I cautiously slap the first petitioner on the cheeks. He’s been sitting there for a long time. Neighbors relieved him of the nice new TV in his room in a communal apartment on Otkrytoe Highway. Voronov has already warned me we’d be rejecting his appeal. This vic will never see a criminal case. He was born to suffer, to be a vic. I’m learning to be like Nikolai Petrovich. Why do you think the street our department’s located on is called Boitsovaya—Fight Street? Pretty strong people live and work here on Boitsovaya. To be blunt, they don’t have much choice.

Here’s another. They just brought her out of a jail cell. She threw her newborn in the garbage. She reeks of sweet cheap alcohol that makes me sick. In the time we spend questioning her I run out four times to our filthy two-holer—one for the cops and one for the crooks—and puke. I must be puking my stomach out. Voronov’s as calm as a sphinx. His ironed white shirt gets whiter and stiffer all the time. He says, “You’ll be going to that garbage heap soon. Believe me. There, in the garbage, you’re going to find the corpse of another newborn infant who had a couple of gulps of air and then got stupidly fucked up. You’re going to feel awful. You’re going to search for his damned mama furiously, you’ll find her, you’ll put her in that chair where you’re sitting now. You’ll sit where I am and look into her eyes in hopes of seeing hell. But what you’ll see is emptiness. Emptiness, my young friend. Emptiness is hell. And vice versa. I want you to lose your illusions as fast as you can and understand all about where, how, and why we are the way we are. Believe me. I’m one of the better ones.”

I get queasy again and dash off. Voronov waits patiently; today he has no intention of stopping.

“By the way, they’re going to give this mama two years’ probation. You’ll be very lucky if this story doesn’t repeat itself on your watch. But if it does, that’s bad. It could break you, even though by then you’ll be pretty tough.”

He hands me a vile cigarette. I try to strike a match and on the fifth try manage to light it. I see the various back alleys through the window. Every day I walk these alleys, but I don’t remember exactly what the streets are called. I’ll admit, I don’t want to either. As far as I’m concerned, it’s just endless emptiness. The whole Eastern District. Not too far from here you get to the school I went to. A little farther and there it is, the tram stop where, in a frenzy, I battered the painted iron kiosk with my fist, trying to take away the pain of love. And there’s the courtyard where I had my first dead body, a dead body whose name and murderer I found. I found him quickly, in the next entryway. At the time I was given a commendation—as the youngest detective. Only Voronov didn’t join in the general rejoicing at my success. He said, “One day everyone’s going to die. Absolutely. Then other people will come, either cops or doctors. They’ll come and tell you the cause of death. You just have to understand, student, that no one in my memory has ever been resurrected by that. Don’t take pride in it or you’ll start wanting to be a little like God.”

Later I cursed him all night long and couldn’t sleep. I think I cried. But in the morning he was standing on Boitsovaya, just like a monument to a poet. Smoking, blowing off the ashes. Waiting for me. He was always waiting for me. He liked working with kids like me.

“Life is a lot of things. And it takes crazy shapes. You don’t mind that I’m like a biology teacher, do you? Love your neighbors and your family. Everyone else deserves death. You think I’m wrong?”

He found a way of instilling all this wisdom of the ages in my head in the three minutes it took us to walk back to the department. I couldn’t remember school or the institute anymore. It was stupid, in fact, to remember those chalk-stained wusses. I had a real man walking on my left. Someone who had known life and then fucked it doggy-style. He always liked to be on top and couldn’t stand lying down. Or sitting down facing you. Or standing. Impressive.

His shift’s over and it’s time for us to go. We leave the department, slipping on the chipped steps, which are coated with a thick layer of ice. Today there hasn’t been a short-timer or drunk in jail—no one to hack the ice off—and the fat guard would never get off his fat ass. All he does is dream of somebody installing a bedpan in his chair so he’ll never have to get up again. We slip and curse and light up. Voronov starts the engine of his Moskvich, which he bought with his fifth wife’s money. His spouse never seemed to begrudge him anything. The most powerful mass-produced engine with the most affordable afterburner. On the highway this battered heap hits as high as 250 kilometers an hour. When they hear that sound, the sound of the engine on Voronov’s heap, young skinheads move to the shoulder out of respect. Right now we’re driving to the Field of a Thousand Corpses. It’s a special kind of place.

I have a little time now, while the car is warming up, while we’re driving. The whole trip takes about fifteen minutes. Let me tell you about this field.



Once, a very long time ago, after God created the earth and people divided it up into pieces, one particular town chopped up its own territory. Each ragged piece was attached to a specific district. Only somewhere, in the very rear end of the Eastern District where several boundaries come together, in Elk Island National Park, the police chiefs messed something up. They ended up with an odd piece of land that wasn’t anyone’s at all. A kilometer by a kilometer. No one lost any sleep over this. What kind of crimes could you commit on that pathetic patch of ground? But those who thought like that were wrong. When all the cops in the vicinity realized exactly what their lands bordered on, that patch of ground turned into a living hell. Unidentified corpses were ferried here, and here they rotted away. Local thugs and uniformed officers both came to settle their disputes. They set up meets here, and once, before my very eyes, there was a very real duel. Two young lieutenants fired at each other over a female expert from the district CSI. I was the second for one of them, and I had to stuff my new jacket into the gaping hole in the wounded guy’s belly. He turned white, then gray, and honestly, never before or after have I seen someone’s face change color that fast.

For those who know anything about life and death, the field is a cult location. That’s where we’re going. Actually, we’re nearly there. Coming toward us through the night, through the black branches, reflecting off the thin crust of ice, are the headlights of someone’s car zapping us in the eyes. They’re waiting for us. Voronov has a lot of friends.

“A guy died here once,” Voronov says, addressing no one in particular, and he kills the engine. But I know—he’s continuing my education. He’s teaching me how to live. We get out of the car and look both ways. A junior agent, Khmarin, takes the alcohol and snacks out of the trunk. “It probably took a few days,” Banderas continues. “His car broke down on the parkway and he crawled here. He lay here, rasping, calling for help. All kinds of vermin ate him up.”

“What kind of vermin?”

“All kinds. It’s a national park. They have wild animals here.” He spits a yellow gob long into the snow.

The oncoming car switches its beams to low. Men get out, shivering in their summerweight leather jackets. I know them only vaguely. District criminal investigations. All friends of my new boss. They’re scary, but I’m getting used to them. For them the field is a known quantity. For me it’s still wild and exotic. We shake hands. The men break up into groups while Khmarin and I serve up an improvised meal on the hood of a long American automobile. There are lots of cars, ten or so. They pull up one after the other, forming a lopsided circle. Each on his own side of the field. I’m cutting sausage with fingers stiff from the cold, and I realize that here today they’re going to solve a dozen crimes ranging from serious to very, just like that, easily, plastic cup in hand. One pours for another, the other for a third. They’re cutting deals, and first thing tomorrow morning they’ll start writing reports.

“Does everyone have some?” Voronov asks, lifting a ribbed white cup.

“Aaaaoooo!” the agents respond.

“Down the hatch,” my boss sums up, sending 120 grams of pepper Kristall down his throat in a single motion. We’re lucky. The Kristall factory is the Eastern District agents’ patrimony. At least we drink high-quality vodka.



Adam’s apples are bobbing. Up and down. The cops are getting a buzz on. Stealthily I pour myself a half at the hip. It’s comfy here sitting on this mossy piece of concrete. Slippery but comfy.

The picnic drags on. It’s looking to be dawn soon. I examine the faces of the men surrounding me. They’re stinking drunk but not repulsive. They’re just talking a little louder, and more and more often their hands, with their thick short fingers, slice the air dangerously close to whoever they’re talking to. Yes, the word “danger” right now couldn’t be more accurate. These men, unpredictable and invested with almost limitless power, could do something terrible stone sober, but now …

Another bottle makes the rounds. And another. I’ve stopped counting and stopped being amazed at the foresight of those gathered. How much did they bring? Their business discussions are drawing to a close. Here and there—bursts of laughter. The cops are in a great mood today.

“Banderas!” a cop shouts from the other end of the field. “Listen, they told me that after a liter you can hit nine out of ten with either hand! They were lying, right?”

“No way.” Nikolai Petrovich throws back his heavy head. “They only lied about one thing: it’s ten out of ten. Even after two.”

The field laughs. This slippery topic ought to be shut down, it seems to me, and I even open my mouth, but they get ahead of me. I think things over too long to say anything original.

“Well now, let’s see if it’s true.” A man of about fifty totters out to the middle of the field. I know him. He’s the deputy chief detective from the next department over. A colonel. He was in line for a promotion to Moscow homicide, but something didn’t work out. They say it was the vodka again. The colonel takes an apple from the pocket of his pretentious leather jacket, blows tobacco flakes off it, and places it on his own head. The field bursts into laughter again.

“Watch,” the young agent Khmarin elbows me in the side. “Something’s about to happen.”

To be honest, I’m scared, but Khmarin is perfectly calm and smiling his big gap-toothed smile.

“Two years ago Banderas stood three Tajiks here, rapists. They didn’t want to write confessions. He put an apple on top of each head, and took out two barrels. They say it stank of shit, but nothing bad happened.”

“Did they write them?”

“Sure did. You’d write anything if a bullet grazed your head.” Khmarin sniffs. “True, I didn’t actually see it. But that’s what people say.”

I don’t doubt that’s exactly how it all went down, but my alarm doesn’t abate. I’m looking at Voronov. He’s very, very drunk. Catching my look, he smiles and the tips of his mustache go up. He comes closer, leans toward my face, bathing me in a haze of vodka, and whispers, “If you get together with an old friend and buy a case of pepper vodka, you can have a pretty decent time of it. You just have to leave your guns at home. Someone told me that too, but I forgot. Just so you remember, student.”

I’m gripped by panic, but changing anything—that’s out of my hands. The colonel stands in the middle of the field and keeps smiling idiotically. The apple is shaking on his head, looking to fall. Voronov marks off twenty-five paces and stands facing him. The cops fall silent. You can touch the silence now, you can cut it with a knife and spread it on bread. Snow crunches under someone’s feet; the officers are freezing in the winter woods, and warm boots are not their style. Voronov gets his nonregulation TT out of his left holster, examines it carefully, and closes his eyes for a second. Right now I can feel him as if I’ve entered into his mind. He aims with eyes closed, without raising the barrel. The next instant something terrible happens. Chilled from standing there in one place, the colonel sneezes. We still haven’t heard the sound and don’t realize what’s happening. All we see is his face suddenly crumple. His mouth opens wide, the apple falls off his shaven head, and the night silence is shredded by gunshot. He sneezes and drops like a sack into the snow. His legs bend, his arms fling awkwardly to the side, and the 7.62 caliber bullet pierces his head like it’s a ripe melon—straight through. Now his left leg twitches spasmodically—the tiniest bit. Once, twice, three times. All his muscles tense and his chest rises and falls. The thousand and first corpse on the field.

No one seems surprised. The agents collect the remains of their feasting silently and efficiently and toss the bottles and snacks into their trunks. One after another the engines start up and the dry snow creaks under their wheels. Another three minutes or so probably pass, or maybe it’s an eternity. And here we are. The two of us on the field. Voronov nervously squeezes the TT in his hand, and I’m frozen in an awkward pose on the mossy concrete.

The colonel’s corpse.

Our eyes meet. Banderas walks over to me and looks me up and down. He throws the gun at my feet.

“Keep it. It’s a present.” He turns on his heel and walks toward his car. “Boy, cops don’t go to prison. They die fast there. Or stop being cops. Or stop being at all.”

“And so?”

“You still don’t understand.”

“Aha.”

“Aha. Idiot. You’re a cop. That’s all. God help you. And if he does—you’ll understand real fast. Bye for now.”

He starts his engine and leaves. I’m alone. I sit like that for another hour, until my drunk is completely passed. My brain is now amazingly clear, and I know what I have to do.

I put on my gloves and pick the TT up by the barrel. I painstakingly wipe the whole gun with my handkerchief and walk over to the corpse. I try desperately to remember whether our colonel was a lefty or not. No, I don’t think so. His fingers have already started to stiffen, but all is not lost. I put the gun in his right hand and carefully survey the field. Yes, all’s well. The apple is lying a meter from the corpse—yellow with a red blush. I pick it up and take a big bite. I like slightly frozen apples. What can I say?

There’s nothing more to do here. Crunching on the apple, I quickly take the path toward Rostokinsky Road. I still have some money. I have to grab a passing car and make my way home. And be at work at 8 a.m. tomorrow.

I know what’ll happen in the morning. Banderas will look me in the eye and I’ll nod silently. He’ll nod in reply and shake my hand. Just like that. Two men shaking hands. He won’t ask questions, since he never asked me to do anything the day before. Everything I did, I did myself, of my own free will. Any one of us in the smoke-filled two-by-three offices at 12 Boitsovaya Street would have done the same.

The months and years will pass, and Nikolai Petrovich and I will share the same two-man office.

We’ll catch, solve, and punish or tell the pesky vics to fuck off.

Old man, you shouldn’t have put your valuable property where everyone could see it. Even on the surveillance cameras in stores they write: The management is not responsible for your valuables. What the hell are we supposed to do?

As it is, we have a heightened sense of fairness, and the next Internal Affairs office over, by the way, has an excellent deputy chief detective now. A young muzhik, smart. A recovering alcoholic, they say; doesn’t drink at all. I should stop by and say hello someday. First we’ll repair the Moskvich since it’s not respectable to go to a first meeting with a colleague with these rusty fins.

I remember everything and know everything, and everyone else knows it too. And I have absolutely nothing to fear. For the last five months I’ve either been staying home or going to the prosecutor’s office. I’m lucky they kept me under house arrest and didn’t send me to Lefortovo because it’s close. Such a stupid thing, you know? It was really dark there, and scary, I admit it. None of us knew what would be there behind the door, and I was standing in front. I haven’t been junior or a student or a probationer for a long time, but I was in front again. My whole life I’ve been in front. When the muscle took out the door and jumped aside, I went in and fired at the sound. Now in my statements—however many there’ve been—I write: She thrust something out toward me. It was a syringe, just a syringe. But at the time I nearly shat myself, word of honor, and fired four times. I shoot well, though not as well as Voronov. When they take us out to the range once a year, he still hits ten out of ten, and my best record is eight. The officer there says that’s actually pretty good. But this time I was like a different person: all four bullets went in side by side, and after that the girl had no chest left.

She was nineteen or so, I don’t remember anymore. My investigator is a good guy, my age. I know before any arrest he’ll let me go home. I call Nikolai Petrovich, we go to our field, and I suggest a game. He can’t refuse me. But he shoots better. This is how it has to be. They can’t put me in prison. I’ll die there. Cops don’t go to prison. They stop being cops there or they die. And it doesn’t make a rat’s ass bit of difference which.





PURE PONDS, DIRTY SEX OR TWO ARMY BUDDIES MEET





BY VLADIMIR TUCHKOV

Pure Ponds





Translated by Amy Pieterse

As usual, Maxim walked at full speed coming out of the Pure Ponds metro station, throwing his muscular legs out in front of him as though they were the cranks of an engine. Actually, an engine—lacking vision, hearing, and a sense of smell—would have had a much easier time in this “heavenly” corner of Moscow. Maxim had to squeeze through two chains of sweaty people, human sandwiches who were handing out poorly printed leaflets with the addresses of a translation agency. Past the piss-stinking bums draped nonchalantly all over the Griboedov Memorial. Past the crazy, long-haired old man with a loud amp who sang psalms accompanied by Arabic music. Past a dozen dogs that took turns drilling the same lascivious bitch. Past the foul creek that our shortsighted forefathers had, for some reason, chosen to call Pure.

Maxim recalled a song that Igor Talkov had sung in his time. Sung until he caught a bullet at a showman’s showdown. A bullet straight out of a handgun that sent him to his final resting place. The mawkish lyrics were a parody of the present situation: Pure Ponds and shy willow trees/Resemble maidens who’ve fallen silent at the water’s edge/Pure Ponds, timeless dream of green/My childhood shore, where the accordion sounds.

Willows? What willows? More like disgusting benches with morons lounging around on them. What accordion? Only the monotonous thumping of electronic music blaring from the windows of cars stuck in a traffic jam.

And maidens? Sluts, all of them!

Maxim hated places like this, places that were once steeped in an aura of history or cultural tradition. Now that Moscow had stuffed itself with oil dollars to the point that it was about to explode and send pus flying in all directions, places like this were identified in his mind with unwashed, stinky socks.

Of course, he could have pretended to be a machine and slipped off to his base, which long ago had been the Jatarang Indian restaurant. He might have moved on by, blind, deaf, and paying no attention to anything. But he was another type of machine entirely. And his capabilities and functions were very different. He had survived to the age of forty thanks only to his capacity to observe the details of his surroundings, any of which might prove a lethal threat to him.

Before, in the mountains of Afghanistan, death could lurk in the swaying movement of a twig, or the suspiciously smooth (not by the hand of the wind, but the hand of a minelayer) dust on the road.

Later, after he’d finished his service and killing became both his trade and his boss, with a big fat wallet, a lawyer, and a manager, the bony face of death could be hiding behind the dark tinted windows of a jeep, in a crowd, around the corner … anywhere. There was no front line anymore, no rear guard, no fortified base. The front line was wherever Max happened to be.

Now that he had chosen to play big time—which he did not so much for the money (he had enough already), but rather to prove to himself and to others that at the age of forty he could still be a match for any little twenty-year-old chump—he was surrounded by death on all sides. Theoretically, guns with silencers could be aimed at his forehead, and at the back of his skull, at his temples, right side, and left, simultaneously. It couldn’t be ruled out that at that very moment someone was aiming an infrared beam at the top of his head. Despite the enviable virtuosity of his five human senses, honed to perfection, he remained vulnerable. He needed his animal instinct. And it had not once betrayed him. Although just once would be enough.

Three weeks ago, Maxim had accepted an invitation to play an amusing game. The jackpot was ten million. The last player (out of twelve) left alive would be declared the winner. The rules were simple. The game board was the Moscow area, within the limits of the beltway. Each player chose his own weapon. You could hook a howitzer to the back of your jeep and drive around town with it, or carrry a sharpened nail file in your pocket. Players were to kill competitors in any way possible, filming the process on a webcam that was connected to an online server. The game’s powerful organizers refused assistance to contestants taken into police custody during play. Such individuals would be put on trial, hence disqualified from the game. They were allotted one month. If there was more than one player left alive when the time was up, the referee would draw lots and the unfortunates would be shot in the head.

The contenders were told that a group of around twenty millionaires were behind the game. They were the ones at the bottom of the Forbes list, the ones with only a sorry twenty or thirty million to their names, which they had come by in the drug trade or illegal gambling. Maxim didn’t really give a damn about who, what, or where. There’s a lot of money sloshing around in this sweepstakes, where folks bet on people, not on horses, cutting each other up with great expertise. As long as they coughed up the prize money at the end of it.

There were only six days left, but he was already bone-tired. He had killed not only five of his opponents, but nine others as well. Collateral damage, it’s called. Three of them were merely the victims of a misunderstanding. A case of mistaken identity. But they had acted suspicious too. And it wasn’t like he had a lot of time to make sure. In that situation, it’s just a matter of who pulls the trigger first. None of them pointed a gun at him, but then, not one of those poor suckers had even had a gun on him to shoot with. Tough luck.

Six of them deserved to die. One of the players had hired them as informers for next to nothing. They shadowed his opponents and kept him notified of their whereabouts. Maxim didn’t feel sorry for them at all. Nope. He recalled how one of them, a nervous guy of around thirty, begged him to spare his life. Said he needed the cash because his five-year-old daughter had sarcoma and needed expensive treatment, or she’d die. And if he died, she wouldn’t make it. Maxim almost let him go, in exchange for the telephone number of the player who hired him. But when he found out it was the same guy who had killed Arkady, his old army buddy, he couldn’t restrain himself. He broke the kid’s neck so quick the guy didn’t even notice his own death. It’s different if you’re nailed to a hospital bed, but not many healthy people see it coming. Death is especially quick at the hands of people who make it their profession. Fast as a bullet that has already found a home inside a lifeless body by the time the shot rings out.

Maxim sure hadn’t expected to find Arkady’s name among the players. They had been close friends back in Kandahar, with ghosts firing mortars at their marine company. And there was Nikita too. They had been the only ones left alive in their platoon. They made a vow of eternal friendship. But a lot had changed since then. Things were different now. And they weren’t the same guys they had been either. Life’s a bitch.

“I really need the cash,” said Arkady, staring at Maxim over the bridge of his nose. “I don’t have a choice.”

“I have no choice either,” Maxim replied. “Although I could do without the cash. In fact, I could even help you out, I’ve got some savings. But it’s too late now to call it quits.”

It was true, the players were already in the game. They’d signed a contract with the devil in blood. Refusal to continue with the game carried a risk of the secret being leaked, so any such player would be liquidated. Everything was absolutely fair. And gentlemanly.

Obviously, Maxim and Arkady agreed that they would not kill each other under any circumstances. If, by the end of the month, only the two of them were left, then lots would be drawn to decide the answer of “to be or not to be,” a bullet shot out of the barrel of a gun in a game of Russian roulette. After all, they were army buddies and not some pussy bastards off the street.

The agonizing problem solved itself, really.



He walked on, scanning everything up ahead—to the left, to the right, behind him—calculating all the possibilities for how the present situation might develop. Two clerks, a mother and daughter, three rough-looking losers, a wino, a student, a bum, a prostitute, an old man, WHO’S THAT? An athlete? Yes, definitely an athlete. Three teenagers with snowboards, a spaced-out druggie, WHO IS HE? HE’S GOT HIS RIGHT HAND IN HIS POCKET! No, his wrist is straight, and the pocket’s too small, yeah, he’s just a jerk. And old woman trying to look younger than her age, a suicide case definitely a suicide, a workaholic, a cop, a guy looking down at the grou—NIKITA!

Yes, it was him. It wasn’t easy to recognize the handsome and easygoing buddy he had known from his army days in this unkempt person, slumped over on a bench with a one-liter plastic bottle of extra strong Ohota beer. Ripped sneakers, his big toes nearly poking out of them, threadbare jeans, a filthy coat. Gray hair speckled his five-day-old stubble and made its way up to his temples and into his once black hair. But most horrifying of all was the expression in his eyes: dull and lonely like an autumn swamp. His gaze wasn’t staring inward. It wasn’t staring outward either. It was unfocused and wandering somewhere in the direction of nonexistence.

Maxim paused, although in the present situation this wasn’t very safe. But he couldn’t just walk past a friend who looked like he needed help.

“Nikita!”

“Oh, it’s you,” Nikita said, as though he hardly recognized the person he was speaking to.

“What’s all that?” asked Maxim, nodding at the plastic bottle that seemed to be a primary attribute of all the downtrodden and hopeless.

“You sure got this life thing all figured out. Looks like you got it made,” Nikita said, his voice so shrill he was almost shouting.

“Hey, what’s wrong with you?” Maxim scanned the hostile territory around him.

“What’s wrong with me? Where were you three years ago? I wrote to you from St. Pete. Tried to get hold of you. And where were you a year ago, when I was all alone, up to my neck in shit? What’s wrong with me?”

“Give me a break! I moved into a new place and got a new number. And I’m not in Moscow much anyway. Come on. What can I do to help you now? I mean it, right now.”

It was obvious the guy was in bad shape. He was angry at the whole world, and appeared comfortable that way. His body language was saying, Forgot about me, the bastards, stabbed me in the back! Not one single son of a bitch came around when I needed help. Well, I don’t need you assholes anymore. Scram! Guys like that never admit that it is they, and not the “bastards,” “sons of bitches,” or “assholes,” who are to blame for their misfortunes. Backed up by such sentiments, they enjoy not shaving and going for weeks without changing their underwear; guzzling Ohota or Baltika 9 as they go under, until they stop somewhere about six feet beneath the earth’s surface and worms start gnawing at what’s left of them. Even worse, Maxim once heard about a dog breeding company where bull terriers were fed a diet of homeless people, live homeless people, to turn the dogs into killers and cannibals.

“You should have helped me out back then when I needed it, before I ended up in Moscow,” said Nikita.

When, at last, he ran out of excuses to prop up his ego, Nikita told his story. It turned out that three years before, in St. Petersburg, he had made some big money and decided to move to Moscow. What’s the big deal, everybody’s going! It’s the city of unlimited possibilities. So he sold his Petersburg apartment and added that money to the bundle he’d received from Valya Matvienko for working on her election campaign, and bought a three-bedroom apartment at Pure Ponds, one that was big enough to house their whole damn platoon back in Kandahar. He partied for a month, spending dollars like they were five-kopek coins. After that, he settled in. Turned out that the easiest part was finding a mate. Or something like that. Whatever. She was beautiful, smart, sexy, and devoted. Or she seemed devoted back then. That was why, three months later, he awarded her the official status of wife, and a note was made of this both in his passport and in an official registry book.

Making a living in Moscow proved much more difficult. He tried opening a souvenir shop on Taganka. They wouldn’t let him. He set up a snack shop at Kitai-Gorod. It was burned down two weeks later. He signed a contract to deliver a small consignment of Polish perfume. He got cheated, cost him fifty grand. Well, after that he gave up on having his own business and got a job as a security guard at the Reutov casino. His salary, plus the interest he received on the Petersburg money he’d put in the bank, was enough to live on quite comfortably.

Fate, however, decided to play a trick on the Afghan war hero. The bank went bust. With great difficulty, Nikita managed to get a tenth of his savings back. But he lost even that at the very same casino where he worked. He went in one weekend just to try his luck. Just about hit the jackpot too. His wife’s devotion, like snow in April, began to melt steadily.

She soon turned into a terrible fury. Even so, her three other good qualities remained. She was sexy (though she stopped sharing that particular quality with her husband). Beautiful. And smart. In fact, she was smart enough to kick Nikita out of the apartment three days ago.

“What are you, some kind of wuss?” said Maxim. “Show her who’s boss! You’ve got fists, don’t you? Tell her to get the hell out.”

“She reregistered the apartment in her own name. I’m like the heir or something.”

“Then kill her! Have you forgotten how it’s done? Make it look like an accident.”

“I can’t. I just got baptized. I made a vow, for the rest of my life. Besides, look.” Nikita stuck his arms out in front of him, palms facing downward. His fingers shook visibly, like those of an alcoholic.

“Ouch,” said Maxim, shaking his head. “I’d head for a monastery, bro. And how about your vow never to touch the drink again?”

They were both silent for a moment, puffing on their cigarettes.

“How about this,” Maxim said, interrupting the silence. “I’ll kick her out myself. Then you’ll be off the hook. Where’s your place?”

Nikita gave him an address. It was nearby, 12 Pure Ponds Boulevard.



Maxim waited around until someone opened the door at the main entrance and then held it open for the young mother pushing a stroller. He went up to the third floor and turned off the switch in the fuse box he found in the hallway. Behind the door, where Nikita’s wife Zhanna lived, the television set fell silent.

Maxim went up one more flight of stairs. He waited, giving her time to call the electric company, who would tell her that everything was working down at the station and that she should check her fuse box.

Of course, Zhanna peered through the peephole, but not seeing even the smallest sign of danger she opened the door. Before she had time to realize what was happening, she was back inside the apartment, a hand pressed over her mouth and her arms clamped to her sides.

Maxim turned the key in the lock twice and carried Zhanna deeper into the apartment.

She tried to resist.

“Don’t make any noise,” he said in a whisper. “If you keep quiet, I’ll let you live. Got it? Whisper.” Slowly, he uncovered her mouth and relaxed his grip. Zhanna was silent as she studied the intruder.

“Money?” she asked softly.

“No.”

“Oh, I get it. My jackass sent you over to say hi. My ex-jackass, that is.”

“He said you were smart, and he wasn’t lying.”

It was then that Maxim noticed that she was also beautiful. Beautiful, as in sexy. The thought occurred to him that there was no real difference between one rape or two. Nikita would understand.

So he changed the character of his grasp: from clenched, to imploring.

He noticed with surprise that she did not try to resist. On the contrary, she seemed to press her body toward him (and she smelled so deliciously female!). She gasped with excitement.

Maxim had an instant hard-on.

But he didn’t lose his head. He took off his coat with the webcam that was always hooked up to the game server, and hung it up in the hall so that the camera was facing the wall. There was no reason for them to watch this.



Zhanna moaned. She squeaked. It was unbelievable. You only come across this kind of girl once every six months, Maxim thought to himself.

He drilled her in her cornhole like a wild animal. Like a baboon. Like an orangutan. And she enjoyed it.

That crazy bitch couldn’t get enough. “More!” she howled, cursing like a Shanghai whore giving herself to a platoon of sailors.

They peeled themselves apart. He listened without interrupting as she praised him. He listened as she cursed her impotent husband. As she begged him to stay. Forever. How happy they would be together. Fucking amazing. Those were the exact words she used: Fucking amazing. But she didn’t just say them. She sang the words, which lost their foulness and gained a certain eloquence. Maxim listened quietly, nodding his head. Dream on, baby, he thought. Dream on.

And then he drilled her some more, with the same ferocity.

He came.

Then he noticed she had an Adam’s apple.

Fuck!

A transvestite!

It was a dirty and dangerous game that Nikita had gotten him into.

He stayed cool, not letting on that he had noticed.

“Let me get us some drinks,” said the transvestite. “Okay?”

“Sure.”

The transvestite brought in two glasses of wine from the next room. And Maxim realized that he wouldn’t drink it even at gunpoint.

He took the glass.

“What’s wrong?”

“I want to watch you drink. You’re so beautiful, I’m sure you drink beautifully too. My cock is ready for action just watching you.”

The transvestite laughed, and took two sips. His Adam’s apple went up and down two times and then stilled. It wasn’t that big. But it was obviously a man’s.

Maxim set his glass down.

“Why don’t we start off with the usual question,” he said, his fingers locking around the transvestite’s throat. Not too tight, but probing. “Who are you working for? Tell me quietly.”

In all likelihood, at that very moment Nikita was glued to his own transmitter, which connected to an opponent’s webcam and mic, and it was extremely important that he not hear a thing. Each player had a transmitter that allowed him to hook up to his opponent’s channels and receive picture and sound from their webcams, broadcast nonstop. The pictures helped players track each other down if they recognized their opponent’s location.

“I don’t understand.”

“Yes, you do. Now listen carefully: this is your one chance to stay alive. Tell me the truth. Everything, and in great detail. Who hired you and why? And what do they want from me?”

The transvestite shrank back. And spilled the beans. About how they sometimes sent people to him who he didn’t know. And he “served” them, the same way he had served Maxim. Then he would put clonidine into their wine. And when his client fell asleep, he would call a certain Artyom, who would finish them off while they were still knocked out. Then, at night, the body would be taken away by two bald guys in a jeep. The transvestite knew nothing more. The answer why seemed pretty clear, but who was behind this? That was the question.

Another question was how had Nikita turned into such a cunt? The traitor! But Maxim tried not to think about that.

“You don’t kill?”

“No,” answered the transvestite, blanching.

“So you guys have a division of labor and everything. You got one son of a bitch working as a decoy, another giving sexual favors, and the third does the killing. Four and five get rid of the body. You guys are a goddamn hockey team!”

“Please don’t kill me,” whispered the transvestite.

“Did you tell me the truth?”

“Yeah, honest. In the beginning I didn’t know what was going on. I just wanted to make a little dough. But then, after that first time, I couldn’t refuse. They’d get me too.”

“All right, you can live. Call him.”

“Who?”

“The killer, Artyom.”



When the door opened, Artyom got a blow on the head with the handle of a gun. As he was collapsing, Maxim saw that it was Nikita.

What a fucking world, Maxim thought. What a goddamn fucking world.

He even spat on the floor. Rather, he spat on Nikita’s stained jacket, which was his uniform.



“All right, holy man, start talking,” said Maxim when Nikita came to.

Nikita was quiet.

“Do you realize you’re not getting out of here alive, you Judas?”

Nikita nodded.

“Did you kill Arkady?”

Nikita nodded his head again, staring at the floor.

“Talk.”

“I had to.”

“What, does your five-year-old daughter have leukemia?” asked Maxim, recalling the thirty-year-old whose neck he’d broken, snapped just like a chicken’s.

“No, I owe big money. They took my wife. Gave me three months to pay.”

“How much?”

“Five hundred grand.”

“Holy shit!” Maxim roared. “What are you doing? I have the money. I have a million! I could have—”

“How was I supposed to know that? It’s like everybody just kind of up and left. Life fuckin’ pulled us apart in all different directions.”

“Okay. I give you my word that I’ll get your wife out of there. Now talk.”



So Nikita started talking again. He told Maxim how the program manager had decided to play under the table. Of course, he kept that secret from the organizers, who paid the prize money. Player number four was supposed to get ten million. No risks on his part, because the manager had put together an unofficial team. That was where Nikita was working. The unofficial team had two functions: guarding number four, and not letting opponents get near him. Also, they got rid of “extra” players using any means possible, including what they had tried on Maxim. The payoff for the mongrel team was supposed to come from the prize money that number four would receive. Nikita agreed. How much the others were getting he didn’t know; naturally, the manager would be taking the largest cut.

When Nikita finished, Maxim handed him a gun with one shot in it.

“Don’t worry about your wife, I’ll get her out. But don’t try any funny stuff, cause you know my response time was always better than yours. Do I make myself clear?”

Nikita nodded and moved into the far room.

Time slowed down to almost a standstill. It got as thick as ketchup that doesn’t want to come out of the bottle in the freezing cold.

Outside, a baby started crying.

Water rumbled in the pipes.

Then it got quiet.

Then a shot rang out.

“That’s it,” said Maxim. “Get dressed.”

The transvestite, chalk-white with fear, started.

“No!”

“Idiot. You’re going with me. You’ll be a witness.”

“Why?!”

“You’re not on trial, darling. But I have to explain to the investors why I crushed all those snakes and cut the manager’s balls off before I killed him.”



Maxim crossed the streetcar tracks and jumped the low barrier dividing the fetid boulevard from the street stinking of exhaust fumes. He strode toward the house with columns, digging the heels of his massive lace-up boots into the road. The manager had twenty minutes left to live. His moronic bodyguards, with earphone wires sticking out from underneath their jacket collars, had even less time.

The transvestite hurried along, sticking close by, in a tight English skirt, his face crumpled in fear. From an outsider’s perspective, it might have looked like a stately middle-aged man walking an exotic, purebred dog.

A bum sitting on a park bench took a sip from the bottle of extra strong Ohota he had just found—miraculously, almost full. What a wonderful evening, he thought to himself.





DECAMERON





BY IGOR ZOTOV

Silver Pine Forest





Translated by Marian Schwartz

Facewise, Ryabets resembles a skull: gaunt, with a deep-set, chalk-white gaze and lips slightly parted—a permanent grin of large yellowed teeth. At school they called him Skull behind his back but didn’t dare to his face, so they gave him a nickname from his last name: Ryaba.

Now that he’s on the wrong side of fifty, the skull resemblance applies to his whole frame: shriveled and bony.

At breakfast Ryabets is reading the Moskovskii Komsomolets police blotter. While he’s tapping around the butt end of his egg with a spoon, while he’s peeling off the shell, he skims through the second-grade girl lost in the taiga outside Krasnoyarsk—takes a bite of buttered bread and chews—the drunk officer who shot a soldier—takes a sip of ersatz coffee—the …

Under “Private Prison with Torture Chamber in Silver Pine Forest,” it says that the cops picked up a naked vagrant wearing handcuffs, right there on the street in broad daylight, with a cracked skull and evidence of beatings to his body. The vagrant called himself Andryukha and managed to say he’d been tortured in a cellar with “electricity and tongs.” He whispered the address, 43 Second Line, then fell silent. They didn’t get Andryukha to No. 67 Hospital in time. He died in a traffic jam without regaining consciousness. The cops went to the address but the jailers were gone and the trail was cold. But the prison was remarkable: three cells with a stun gun, tongs, a rack, a Spanish boot, and all kinds of other things. The two corpses were also Silver Pine Forest vagrants. An investigation is under way.

Ryabets sets the newspaper aside and looks out the window. July. Hazy, hot, and stuffy. When he’s finished with breakfast, he puts his Marlboros, towel, swimsuit, three big sausage sandwiches (carefully wrapped in that same newspaper so they wouldn’t go bad), a bottle of water, a bottle of 777 port, and a plastic cup into a paper bag.

He tucks his short-sleeved shirt into his pants and slips on his sandals. Two trolley stops to Kaluzhskaya and then the subway to Kitai-Gorod. The route remembers itself, even though the last time he took it was back in the early 1970s, when Kitai-Gorod was called Nogin Square. Transfer to the purple line to Polezhaevskaya. He’ll ask from there.

Not much out the trolley window has changed in all those years: dust, buildings, poplar trees. Here’s the arched bridge and to the left another bridge—red cables, looks new. Beyond that the river and the Krylatskie Hills. The trolley dives down a slope and stops at a square. Ryabets gets out.

A few streets fanning away, fences, and behind the fences pines and high dacha roofs. Ryabets glances around—should be here somewhere. There used to be a beer stand here, but not anymore. They’d gone from the beer stand to the dacha last time. Not him. His feelings were hurt so he went home. Bolt took his book away from him. A word clicked in his memory:Decameron. Oh yeah—a stinging sleet slashing at the burn site, his heel making little holes in the black muck—the cover was charred, with dark blue, intricate twisting letters, Bolt’s book … He came here in the fall, before the army. How could he not? No, later.

It’s too hot for port … He then bought beer at a stand and took a sharp left turn into the woods.



Ryabets sleeps briefly. Right here under this willow. The beer-sun has taken it out of him. More like dozing, with quick dreams involving water splashing, children squealing, and a female mocking whisper directly above him. He opens his eyes but no one’s there and it’s quiet. Close them and all over again—a squeal, a splash, a whisper. And a rustling—are they stealing his bag? No one, a total haze. He sits up, gazing blearily at the river and at the white church on the opposite bank, cockeyed.

Below—stretch his legs out—the evening water lightly laps-spills over. Music, laughter, a shashlik smell coming from beyond the fence on the private beach. A volleyball thumps. A little closer, in a chaise longue, a woman with a book. The view from behind: short haircut, folds in her neck, the edge of her glasses, her ass. Ryabets reaches into his swimsuit and tugs and tugs—nothing doing. A languid spite sours inside him. He did drag himself all the way out here! Halfway—no, all the way—across Moscow!

The woman is approached by another, younger, who leans over and says something as her white breasts rise lusciously from her blue swimsuit. Ryabets is back in his trunks, kneading away furiously. Nothing. The cupola radiates an officious sneer. He gives the church a dirty look and kneads and kneads. Out of the corner of his eye he notices Luscious observing him, a combination of revulsion and curiosity on her face. He pulls out his hand. Just scratching. He stands up—his trunks sag in back—scrambles down the bank, and swims noisily. The water isn’t refreshing; it’s too warm.

Ryabets slowly plies the shoreline, watching Luscious. You’d think he wouldn’t care, but imagine, he’s horny; he feels dumb too, old goat.

Once Luscious leaves, Ryabets moves ashore. He towels off and gets out the 777: to drink or not to drink? No, first go there. He eats his sandwich, takes one last look at the address in the paper, gets dressed, and leaves.

First he follows the shore and edges around the beach fence, but immediately, in a young pine grove, he runs across some naked men lying there, privates exposed. Ryabets sidesteps them but the farther he goes, the more naked men there are catching some rays, arms spread wide. “Cocksuckers,” he mutters, veering more to the left. He tries not to look but can’t help it. The bushes along the river are filled with naked men’s bodies. He spits. Right in the middle of Moscow!

He fantasizes TNT exploding and scraps of genitalia in the bushes—too many to collect! The bloody image calms him, and Ryabets moves deeper into the woods, emerging on paths that lead to Lake Bezdonka. Evening is falling and the crowds stretch from the riverbank to the park entrance. Ryabets has nearly changed his mind about going to the address in the newspaper. He’s tired. He wants to go home. He’s walking down Tamanskaya when across the street on the left he notices a street sign: Second Line. He stands there a second and turns. Did I make the trip for nothing?

The street is suddenly quiet. The dachas are behind a fence. Turrets, porticos, balconies. As if they weren’t right next to that half-naked, heat-wasted mob. No. 43. In back of them, a new red-brick, three-story house. The kind ministers of state and oligarchs live in, Ryabets thinks. Actually, the house gives the impression of being uninhabited. Ryabets “accidentally” pushes the gate, which yields with a light creak. The house is standing where the dacha burned; Ryabets recognizes the lawn behind it and the semicircle of tall pines. But a prison? Construction debris, doorframes in their original packing, the porch unfinished. On the door, yellow police tape—looks like this was indeed the prison.

Cautiously he unsticks the tape and opens the door. Inside it’s half-dark, and he senses the staircase on the right. He gropes for the light switch on the wall and heads downstairs. Exactly: three cells fabricated out of thick sticks. In front of him a table, two chairs, and a mechanism that looks like a welding apparatus. Were the cops too lazy to pull it out? On the floor, reddish-brown spots and broken glass. Torture—and why not? Hah! Vagrants, human matter. Hah!

Ryabets doesn’t linger. It’s all just like the paper said. He goes upstairs, turns off the light, walks out, and puts the tape back. Not a trace of the other dacha, as if it were never there. He wants to go home.

But before he moves out to the street he decides to take a look, refresh his memory, see where he kept watch once upon a time. Over there, over there … Wait, wait …

In the lilac bushes past the pines, in the exact same place, he notices a figure on the ground. The instinct to flee subsides instantly. No cop would sit squatting in the bushes! On top of everything else, it’s a female. She waves. He’s walking, glancing from side to side to make sure no one else is there. But there is. The female has a dog at her feet. It raises its head to Ryabets.

“Got anything to drink?” she asks. “Who are you?”

Definitely a woman. And drunk. Two leathery folds are slipping down her belly from her unbuttoned pink top. Cellulite legs in white ankle socks spread wide. Bezdonka, hah!

While Ryabets is considering her, the woman takes out of her bag (just like his with his Marlboros) a bottle (just like him with his 777), tosses her head back, and glugs down the last of the liquid. She kicks an empty bottle aside.

“Commander, fill my glass! See? Not a drop! I won’t fucking say anything to your wife.”

A flat face, dark, slit eyes, no neck, formless all over. Like a steak! Ryabets thinks culinarily. But something very familiar I can’t put my finger on. What?

“Ryaba? Ryaba! Ryabets! Is that you? Yes, it is!” The woman scrambles onto all fours, straightens up, and starts hobbling toward him, as if she were wearing prostheses. The dog, too, yawns and wags its tail.

Buratina! Fucking amazing. Burataeva! he shouts in his mind.

This clumsy creature had been Ryabets’s erotic dream. Nadya Burataeva—Buratina, as they’d called her in school. The nickname was a jibe at her flat, half-Kalmyk, but definitely not Buryat, nose.

“And you’re just the same, Ryaba, just the same. Maybe a little shrunken, hee hee hee! Still jerking off?” Burataeva’s a meter away and Ryabets can smell her sour stench. “What are you standing there for? Pour! To our meeting! You wouldn’t begrudge Nadya Burataeva a drink, would you? How many years has it been? Eh? Gotta be thirty.”

Ryabets reaches into his bag, removes the bottle and cup, pulls the cork out with his teeth, pours, and offers it to Buratina. He drinks from the bottle.

“So tell me, how have you been? What’s up?”

* * *

Ryabets is sitting under a pine facing Buratina. Echoes of her fate surface right away. She was burning up in the fire so she jumped, broke her foot and back, spent a long time in recovery, and after all that discovered she was pregnant. It was born dead, actually. She went quickly downhill. Her parents supported her but she drank, then her lover (a recidivist) did and she drank, they put him in jail and she drank, her parents died and she drank, another pregnancy and she drank, a miscarriage and she drank, she sold everything and drank, her apartment too and drank, disappeared and drank.

“This is Polkan,” she introduces.

Ryabets nods but the dog isn’t taking to him.

“Don’t wet your pants, Ryaba, he won’t touch you. He’s been with me since he was born. Andryukha brought him when he was just a puppy, thi-i-is little. You can’t imagine how glad I am to see you, Ryaba!” Buratina hiccups. And in a gleeful non sequitur: “They shut down the beer stand a long time ago, back under Gorbachev. And all the stores too. We go over the bridge, to Priboy. I’ve been living here ten years, Ryaba, across Bezdonka. I’m moving to Kazan station now. They say it’s a rich place—you can take melons off the trains from the Chuchmeks. You won’t die of hunger near a train station. I’m not staying here, no way.”

“Why?” Ryabets recalls the morning paper.

“Hell if I know!” Buratina shrugs. “Everyone’s run off. Even Andryukha. He promised me. ‘You and me, Nadya, we’ll go to Kazan station, I won’t abandon you.’ So where’s Andryukha now? Kaput. Hee hee hee.”

“Why are you limping?”

“I’m limping? What do you mean I’m limping? What do you mean? I know why I’m limping, I know. But I won’t tell you. Never!” Then she mutters under her breath, “Maybe I’m Madame de La Vallière! Listen, Ryaba, I’m limping because I’m Madame de La Vallière!”

If Ryabets had known how to put his emotions into words, it would have come out something like this: Did I really lust after this woman once? Her? Me? Incredible! Ryabets crinkles his nose.

“… How I’ve lived this long I don’t remember, Ryaba. I took a leap from the second floor! Broke both my little legs. I could’ve suffocated. All the others did: my Alik, and Lidukha, and those other two, I don’t remember who they were. And that fat one who carried around the pictures of women.”

“Boltyansky?”

“That’s it, Ryaba, exactly! He suffocated.” And suddenly she winks. “Should I tell you?”

“What?”

“This! Remember how you used to moon over me, Ryaba? Remember? Hee hee hee! You did, I know you did! But I wouldn’t give it up for you! I would for anyone else, but not you.” She falls silent and starts rocking from side to side.

“Is it true there was a prison here?”

“Definitely. Yes!” And now he can’t tell whether it’s the drink talking or she’s serious. “I won’t let you have any now either, so don’t get any ideas! Don’t you look at how old I am … You’re no stud yourself. All skin and bones. They used to call you Skull, remember?” She fell silent for several moments, then suddenly: “Andryukha died here. Kirei died and Sabel died. We were four in this pipe—I mean the four of us lived together … I’m all alone now … Andryukha left a week ago, said he’d grab me some booze … He didn’t … It’s scary here, Ryaba. Where can I take Polkan? Huh? They won’t let him into the train station. Will you take him?”

“That’s all I need.”

“Yeah, right. You like a little port now and then too, I see! Like when we were kids. Don’t you make enough for a little brandy, Ryaba? What’s your job these days?”

“Cook.”

Buratina whistles. “In a restaurant?”

“A cafeteria. I feed the black-assed negroes at the university. Fortunately, it’s only ten minutes from home.”

“What do you cook for them?”

“Oh, everything: goulash, groats, cabbage soup.”

“Did you ever try foie gras?”

“That’s only a name: it’s goose liver. What’s there to try? Put it in rassolnik, potroshki—just the ticket. And the cucumbers have to be thickly sliced, preferably marinated.” Ryabets pauses to pour for Buratina. “Here’s to our meeting!” He takes a swig.

“Ryaba, you know why I wouldn’t let you have any? You look all cold, but on the inside—phooey! One of those. Us girls didn’t like you; you had this look, like you wanted to maul us. Maul us with your eyes and go down there with your nose. Hee hee hee! Our dear departed Bolt was like that too, but I felt sorry for him. Who was going to give that fatso any? He carried those dirty pictures around, but you mooned, you just egged me on. Oh, poor Bolt! And poor Mesropych, even if he was a stinker.”

“Why be sorry? They’re gone.”

“Who would have thought? Not one gray hair,” Buratina mutters.



“How’d you see me?” They’re sitting in total darkness now and can’t even make out each other’s faces anymore. Buratina’s smoking, a cheap bitter smell.

Ryabets stands up to pee. He’s not shy.

“Don’t piss on the grave!” Buratina cries.

Ryabets says nothing.

“Listen, Ryaba, here’s what I’m thinking. Maybe I could come to your place? With Polkan …?” The dog growls huskily. “I’ll wash up. Do you live alone? Are your mother and father dead?”

“Yeah.”

“I can’t even remember the last time I slept anywhere clean. What’s there for me here? They killed Andryukha! And Kirei … and Sabel … What about you, Ryaba, not married?”

“No.”

“Why not? Waiting for a princess? Or for me? Hee hee hee! Maybe I’ll give you some today, but Ryabets …” Buratina babbles.

Sometimes he can’t tell whether she’s really drunk or just pretending.

“You didn’t answer me, Ryaba. Why haven’t you gotten married?”

“I’ve been waiting for my dick to grow up.”

“Hee hee hee! You? I don’t believe that! Why did you jerk off outside my window? I remember …”



“My first little darling is lying over there.” She nods toward the fence and a night-black honeysuckle. “Do you think his little bones are still there?”

Ryabets imagines the child’s half-decayed bones. “Of course not, after all those years. Maybe a skull … or the tibias, they’re thick.”

“You’re a chef, you should know. And the second one next to him. I buried them at night, the snow was coming down; I remember, it was November.”

“You got the first from Mesropych?”

Buratina nodded and hiccupped.

“Whose was the second?”

“I don’t know. I was sleeping with everyone. I’d go to sleep under one and wake up and another’s going at it. Let the dogs have their way! And my baby girl. She’s lying right over there. She’d be nine … Pour me a little, why don’t you.”

Ryabets splashes some in the cup and Buratina drinks greedily.

“My baby girl was Andryukha’s. We lived over there, where you see the gazebo now. We had a concrete pipe, like this.” Buratina tries to show him how big with her hands. “We lived there a good five years. Or more. With Andryukha and Sabel, and Kirei came later.”

“You mean you gave birth there?”

“Where else, I’d like to know! Andryukha sterilized the knife in the fire and cut the cord. I wanted to leave my little girl, my baby daughter, with them, the people with the fanciest house. I thought at least then she’d have a life. Only she died a week later. Right when I was about to give her up. Andryukha would bring her food, he knew the cashier at the store on Zhivopisnaya, a good woman, and she gave it to him for free. Milk, Ryaba, and cereal. You can imagine what my milk was like. My little girl …”

Buratina strokes the ground and weeps silently, only her sniffling gives her away.

The noises on the other side of the fence have died down completely. Only occasionally does a car whoosh by, unseen.

“It was nice when we lived in the pipe, Ryaba. Even in the winter, it was a palace! We’d fill up the opening on one end and hang a towel over the other. A foursome makes it cozy—terrific! Tchaikovsky Hall! There weren’t any windows, but what good would they do? And the other cops left us alone. They’d come, take a look, and leave. There was this one, Lieutenant Bessonov, he was old and had a red nose, a lush. He’d come have a smoke at our fire. He used to say that when he retired he’d move in with us. Hee hee hee! He’d just grab his fishing rod from home, he didn’t need anything else. That’s what he used to say. He was joking, that cop. Later he disappeared. And the cops turned mean! They set all my stuff on fire twice, Ryaba, they burned it! Oh, what good stuff … mattresses! We moved over under the bridge, then to the church—you know the one, past the bridge? But now, Ryaba, that’s it, it’s time to stop!”

Buratina stirs, and Ryabets listens.

“Pour me some more. I’m going to drink my fill today, as if it were the last time, Ryaba! My life’s been bitter. And now I have to go to Kazan. They must have their own ways there, those station whores must be on top there!”



“Did you think I didn’t know? Hee hee hee! It was you who burned down the dacha, Ryaba. You! You! Damn it all.”

“Cut the crap.”

“You always wanted me. I remember the way you used to look at me, the way you hung around outside my window, peeping! Hee hee hee!” Buratina’s voice is so raspy he can hardly make it out. “You still had your beret, the brown one. Ryaba in his beret!”

Ryabets remembers those fall evenings well. He did walk around under Buratina’s windows, since she lived on the second floor, and he would keep an eye out—in the window just a fine veil of tulle, and Buratina prancing around her room in her panties, tight white panties. Before she went to bed she’d examine herself in her window reflection. She really didn’t have a mirror? She’d touch her breasts, belly, hips. Those brief minutes were the ones Ryabets lived for. He never suspected that Buratina was doing that for him, the spy in the night.

She was telling the truth. In school Ryabets couldn’t take his eyes off her. Everyone knew it. He’d sneak up behind her after class, staring at her strong, curvy legs, and fantasize. Knowing this, she’d tease him. First she’d stick her foot out in the aisle between their desks, then happen to clasp her breasts, then happen to touch herself down there. She was teasing him, and in his erotic visions every night, he tortured her ingeniously as only a youthful imagination can. None of his classmates digested the porn Boltyansky unfailingly brought to school as avidly as Ryabets. He’d arrive at school in the morning listless and gray from lack of sleep.

After the fire he found out that Buratina had survived and was in the hospital, pregnant. He was afraid to visit her. But he did visit the burn site right before he went into the army. His three years’ service were pretty cushy, stationed at a garrison kitchen in Baltiisk. He was eventually discharged and went back to those windows, but Buratina was gone. Her Kalmyk father was watching television in the next window; her mother was bustling around the kitchen. He kept going back there for two weeks. After dark. He started culinary school, graduated, and wound up at the cafeteria where he’d worked to this day. He’d lived unsociably, especially after his hard-drinking parents both died. He never married. He gratified his urges (occasionally, on days he got an advance or a paycheck) with train station prostitutes, whom he threw out after coitus. Had they known that he could barely stop himself from strangling them as he was ejaculating, they would have thanked their lucky stars.

Later he moved on to self-service, thanks to progress: there probably wasn’t a better collection of porn films in Moscow.



“Bolt was better than you, just fat. He didn’t jerk off under my window. He came to me honestly and said, ‘Give me some, Buratinachka, just once. What’s it to you?’ Hee hee hee! He’d come down to my place. We lived near each other, remember? Like he had a question about biology.” (Buratina was good at biology; she’d wanted to go to medical school.) “He’d come and sit down and breathe hard, like a sperm whale … He’d bring me that book … what was it? About the Italians who told stories.”

“The Decameron.”

“That’s it! He said he’d taken it from his parents. He’s reading it out loud and squeezing his thigh … And he stinks to high heaven, Ryaba, from cologne. He must have poured half a bottle on himself so I’d give him some. I even thought maybe I should. Why let the guy suffer? But I decided—first Mesropych … I wanted him to pop my cherry, hee hee hee! Then we’d see! I had some real studs, didn’t I, Polkan boy?” Buratina scratches the dog’s scruff again. “I’m a whore! I’d give some to Polkan, but the animal gets me all scratched up. What do you expect? Hee hee hee!”

Ryabets remembers. He remembers very well. He remembers Buratina being the only girl in their class—to the envy of the other girls and the greater dissatisfaction of Pichuga, their homeroom teacher—to wear lacy stockings, which made Ryaba’s heart race.

“Remember, Ryaba, the story in that book when one woman arranges to meet him at her house? He comes, and the maid says, ‘Wait a little, her husband’s there …’ And she—the maid, that is—gets it on with the man. That guy was out in the cold all night! Just like you! Hee hee hee. But later he had his revenge, he drove her out on the roof, I think … Right?”

Buratina takes the bottle and finishes it off in one swig.

“Whoo! All right, Ryaba, what the hell. You can’t bring ’em back. Not Bolt, not Mesropych, not Lidukha. I don’t remember the others.” She suddenly falls over, first on her side, then facedown. “But you, Ryaba, you’re not getting any. I was going to give you some, but I’m not. Sleep, my beloved children.”

Her hands stroke the rough grass and fall still.

Ryabets has a headache. He shuts his eyes. He should be getting up. It’s late. He’s not going to spend the night here, on her children’s bones. Or is this crazy woman lying? Though no, she said some sensible things too. Such a strange day. But there’s still the newspaper. His mother didn’t give him up when that detective came poking around. He’d asked, Could someone have fought with Mesropych, or Boltyansky, or even Burataeva? From their class, maybe someone was getting back at them? Or was it just the drinking and carousing? The detective questioned everyone. With some, he went to their houses; others he called in. Eventually he decided it was an accident, a cigarette butt. Besides, it was so dry there. Like now. Drier even. The peat burned, definitely. There was smoke. People were coughing.

Crackle, pain, heat. Ryabets opens his eyes and sees Buratina, her arm raised, holding the bottle—the moon’s predatory reflection on its jagged edges. She’s going to kill me! He moves to the side, Buratina falls—crack!—a red rose plunges into the sand.

“Bitch,” he whistles, clutching her shoulders and pressing her to the ground. “You wanted to kill me?”

Buratina is silent, and for a moment her back is tense under Ryabets’s hands, but then it goes slack. He holds her down with his knees and moves his hands to her neck. Blood drips black on her hair. He smells fresh urine. Finding the thyroid cartilage, he presses and presses on it from both sides, vividly imagining her anatomy. A quiet whistle like from a bicycle tire, and then silence. Off to the side Polkan’s shadow is wagging its tail, baring its teeth. “Nadya, Nadya!”



“You never read The Decameron?” Boltyansky exclaims.

Ryabets doesn’t like Boltyansky. That he’s fat is bad enough, but he has those sticky little hands and those manicured nails, damnit. On top of it all, Boltyansky keeps bringing porn to school, photos blurry from being copied so many times. Girls with big tits and grayish bodies (the result of the copying) straddling muscle-bound guys. Or offering up their cushiony asses. Or spreading their lips. One look is all it takes and then there is strawberry jam all over the floor.

Boltyansky shows the photos in his hand, gripping them with his little pink fingers. If for the others the viewings are a standard diversion, it’s different for Ryabets. The sticky feeling has degenerated into horror at a female’s touch, be it a hand, elbow, accidental breast, or innocent hair. Even his mother’s touch—extremely rare, fortunately—repulses him. If Praskovya Fyodorovna so much as strokes his head when she’s tipsy, it turns his stomach and make his insides clench up.

“Droll Stories too. That’s Balzac,” Boltyansky preaches. They’re walking home from school.

“Can I read it?”

“I’ll bring it tomorrow. I’ll bring The Decameron, not Balzac. Balzac’s in a series. My parents would notice. They don’t let me lend books. The Decameron’s better than Balzac anyway. Balzac just has one weird story, about how he disguised himself as a woman so he could fuck her. Well, I mean, first he’d make friends and all that, you know, and then he’d fuck her. The rest is just boring. The Decameron’s more interesting.”

Boltyansky does bring The Decameron, a fat blue volume with an elegantly lettered title, and gives Ryabets a two-week deadline. Ryabets skims the yellowed pages and sets it aside. Final exams are starting soon.



“Wouldn’t you know? The minute I climb off her, the bell! She goes to the door and wipes off the blood, all scared. ‘Who’s there?’ Boltyansky: ‘It’s me, Nadya.’ Her: ‘Damn! What do you want?’ Him: ‘Want to go for a walk?’ Ha ha ha!” Mesropov nearly falls down laughing. “Just imagine. A walk!”

“What did she say?” Ryabets’s lips are dry. He and Mesropov are standing in the schoolyard. The graduation party is starting in half an hour. Everyone’s already been drinking and they’re sharing the news half-soused.

“She’s practically rolling in laughter. Well, I sneak up from behind while she’s talking to him through the door and give it to her good! If only Bolt could have seen what we were doing four inches away!”

Six months before, Mesropov had vowed that before graduation night he was going to pop the cherry of one of their classmates. Fiercely handsome and ox-eyed, he drove the girl crazy.

“I just came and he says again, ‘Nadya, Nadya’”—Mesropov mimicked Boltyansky’s squeaky voice—“‘Let’s go for a walk …’ Well, I yanked the door open! Just as I was, no underpants, only a T-shirt! And a rubber flapping in my hand. Catch! Bolt’s eyes bug out and he runs! Ha ha ha!”

“What about her?” Ryabets is breathing fast.

“Who? Nadya? Nadya’s fine, Ryaba, just fine. She plays along! We fucked like bunnies for hours. Whoo! I can barely stand up. So we’re going to Silver Pine Forest tomorrow, right, Ryaba? Nadya’s got this friend, Lidukha. She’s little but she’s got titties out the wazoo! I’d rather have Lidukha, but Nadya … It’s nice there, in the forest. Never been? Tons of bushes! ‘Under every bush she kept a table set and a home!’ Ha ha ha!”

Some other classmates come up and Mesropov starts recounting his adventure.

“Bolt gave me The Decameron to read,” Ryabets says when he’s finished.

“What? The De-cam-er-on? Give me a break! That Decameron’s kid stuff. Ever heard ‘Luka Mudischev’? The actor Vesnik does it. ‘The Mudischev clan was ancient, it had a patrimony, villages, and giant firs!’ Come over, I’ll play it! The Decameron. Hah! Kid stuff, Ryaba, kid stuff!”

“It all depends on your imagination,” Tregubov the intellectual interposes weightily. “Some guys can get off on a keyhole. I don’t think The Decameron’s half bad. Quattrocento, feast during the plague … Italy! It’s not ancient Russia. Signorine, not girls! Pinos, not pines!”

Tregubov knows what he’s talking about. In his not quite seventeen years he’s the only one in class who’s been abroad, he even lived in Italy. His father worked at the Soviet consulate in Rome.

“Pinos? Is that like a blowjob?” Mesropov.

“No, amico mio, it’s a Mediterranean pine tree. A sky of purest blue! The sea! The sun! O sole mio/sta ’nfronte a te!/O sole, o sole mio/sta ’nfronte a te!/sta ’nfro-o-o-onte a te-e-e-e!” Tregubov sings, breaking into a falsetto.

“A goddamn Caruso!” Mesropov says with respect.

Boltyansky enters the yard wearing a black suit and a skinny black tie. His black hair is combed back and slicked so it shines. Seeing Mesropov, he nearly stumbles and his cheeks break out in red spots.

“Hey, pino,” someone shouts, “want to go for a walk?”

Friendly laughter.



Ryabets doesn’t stick around for the party. He takes his diploma and leaves. As he’s walking down the stairs from the auditorium, Boltyansky catches up to him.

“You’re taking off?”

“What do you care?”

“You’re not staying for the dance?”

“I don’t give a damn about that.”

“When are you going to return the book? My parents have been asking. Did you read it?”

“Not all of it. Exams. I’ll finish tomorrow. I’m fast.”

Buratina passes them on the stairs. Powdered cheeks, high heels, short little skirt, lacy stockings, and looking slightly sloshed—she’s giggling oddly. Boltyansky licks his lips. Three more steps up and she stops.

“Ryaba, want a drink? The kids are in the gym. They still have some left.”

“No, I’m going home. I have a headache.”

Ryabets can’t tear his eyes away from Buratina’s legs. She smiles.

“Home, home, home,” she teases. “To his mama … Why don’t you come to Silver Pine Forest tomorrow? Third beach. Know it? We’ll go swimming at 5 or 6, when we wake up. My girlfriend Lida has a dacha there, her parents are taking off, so …”

“Fine,” Ryabets rasps, and heads downstairs.

“What’s with you?” he hears the teasing directed at Boltyansky. “Want to go for a walk? Hee hee hee!”



Boltyansky calls at 4 or so.

“Are you going to Silver Pine Forest? Did you forget?”

“Too far.”

“That’s okay, you can stay over. Nadya’s friend has a dacha there.”

“I don’t know, maybe I will.”

“And grab The Decameron. My parents are pestering me.”

“All right.” Ryabets hangs up.

Followed by a surprise: Buratina. She’s calling! In the whole ten years they’ve been in the same class, this is the first time.

“Ryaba, hi.” A depressed voice, as if she’s holding back tears. “Are you going to Silver Pine Forest? Take me.”

Ryaba’s heart is pounding. Joy! But fear too. Picturing Nadya in a swimsuit, he can’t imagine what he’ll do with himself. His swimsuit’s going to bristle!

“All right.”

“Should I come by then? In an hour?”

Ryabets hangs up and runs to the bathroom. He decides that if he does it a few times he might get by … He twirls in front of the mirror—uses his mama’s powder on his zits, combs his hair back, then parts it; changes his shirt, rolls up his sleeves, rolls them down. What else? What if she walks in, he kisses her, she responds, and—

A ring. Not the door, the phone. It’s her.

“Listen, Ryaba, I’ll wait for you at the bus stop. If I come over, you’ll rape me. You gave me such a look yesterday! Hee hee hee!”

Oof!

Ryabets grabs his bag and towel, throws The Decameron in—he suddenly remembered—and runs outside.

Nadya’s wearing a yellow shirt with the top buttons undone, and there are her breasts. And a miniskirt too. Her face is creased; she drank and partied all night long. She’s got a mark on the back of her neck. A hickey? Her eyes, half-Kalmyk to start with, are swollen; the abundant mascara highlights this. Her perfume—from a long way off. Ryabets stares and joy bubbles up inside him alternately with horror.

It’s a long trip: trolley, subway, transfer, subway, trolley. Ryabets notices glances at his companion—men’s leers, women’s frowns.

Ryabets can’t for the life of him figure out why she isn’t with Mesropov. It’s a puzzle. Going with Mesropov makes sense. Mesropov would take her in a taxi. All the way to the beach. His parents are really rich.

The trolley crosses the bridge toward pines, pines, and more pines. Pinos.

“Lidukha lives way over there,” Nadya points out the window. Tall green and blue dachas with turrets amid century pines. “We’ll go to her place after the beach, tonight. Her parents are off traveling somewhere. Will you go?”

“Maybe,” Ryabets mumbles.

They get out. Ryabets is holding his bag in front for obvious reasons.

They’re walking down the road next to a very high fence.

“Who lives here? Artists?” he asks.

“Big shots, diplomats, and artists too. Did you see the Japanese flag behind the fence at the stop?”

“Lucky dogs … In Moscow, but like being in a forest.”

Nadya shrugs.

They leave the road and walk among the pines across the sand. Nadya takes off her platform shoes. Ryabets lags behind a little. Make up your mind! is knocking in his brain. She went into the forest on purpose, on purpose!

He puts his hand on Nadya’s shoulder. The girl stops.

“What are you doing?” She removes his hand.

“I … I—” He drops his bag and tries to put his arms around her.

She dodges him. “That’d be just great. This place is full of people!”

“I … I … just … wanted … to kiss you.”

“Kiss me?” She gives him a quick kiss on the lips. “There! Later, later …”

“When?” Ryabets rasps.

“Tonight, maybe. Who makes love in the afternoon?”



Mesropov and the gang are already at the beach. Boltyansky’s there too. The others are strangers, dark-haired and guttural, Mesropov’s fellow tribesmen. They greet the appearance of Ryabets and Burataeva cheerfully, by pouring the Armenian brandy. Ryabets doesn’t drink. He takes a whiff and sets it aside. First of all, he’s never tried anything stronger than New Year’s champagne, and second, he’s angry. Nadya’s the only girl in the group. She goes for a swim. She swims for a long time and he watches her. She’s already squealing and giggling, and they’re already pawing at her. Mesropov and his friends. “Bastards! Bastards!” he shouts with his head under water so no one can hear.

They play ball, jump around, roughhouse. Ryabets sits on a lounge and rages. Then they wander over to a beer stand on Krug. Mesropov and Burataeva take up the rear with their arms around each other. Ryabets looks back. He doesn’t go near Buratina at the beer stand or later when they finally show up at the dacha of Lidukha, a little brunette with small, intense eyes. She greets her guests on the porch. Mesropov kisses her hand, and at that moment Buratina remembers Ryabets and glances around. He’s standing at the gate.

“Are you coming or what?”

“No, I’m going home.”



He’ll kill her, the bitch, he will.

Ryabets squeezes his dry fists.

Laughter from a second-story window: “Ha ha ha ha! Ho ho ho ho! Hee hee hee hee!”

That last is hers.

Ryabets feels the rough wall. It’s dry, it’s going to burn, so don’t cry, mama!

First, gasoline. No problem. There’s a car by the gate.

Second, a hose. Where’s the hose? There—the dead snake on the dry grass. Everything’s very dry. Laughter and more laughter. Drunken and insolent. And music. Someone’s puking.

Third, a bottle. Here’s a jar under the porch. Two of them. Liter bottles. Great!

Ryabets uses his teeth to rip off a piece—about a meter long—of the snake-hose’s black flesh. There we go, there. He twists off the gas cap. Now suck—ha ha—suck! Acrid fumes, more, more … till you feel like puking. More, more … E-ro-tic! Boltyansky would say. He wouldn’t have to listen to his, Boltyansky’s, laughing, fearless, or him jerking off in the hall … Not a damn thing was going to be left of him either.

It’s flowing! First down the throat, then into the jar. A liter. Let’s pour. Another liter. That’s it, no more sucks out. That’s enough. It’s so dry it could catch without gasoline.

Now to wait. Cover the jar with a towel at least, so it doesn’t evaporate off, and wait-wait-wait.

Ryabets moves away from the dacha and sits leaning up against a sticky pine trunk. Wait. It’s a good thing there’s no dog. No dog.

Ryabets’s hand slithers into his pants. No, he shouldn’t. If I come I’ll back down. It’s wrong. For three years she’s all I’ve been thinking of. Hands off!

Her short haircut in the window. She’s smoking, tapping the ashes right where he was just standing. Oops! The butt flies like a drunken star and drops next to his invisible feet. And smolders. But it could catch fire. It could. Excellent. She’s gone. Yesterday Mesropov said he wanted her girlfriend. But who wants her? These guys? The Chuchmeks? Bitch.

It’s not jealousy, it’s justice. Like in The Decameron. She keeps him waiting in the yard in winter while she consoles herself with someone else. Italy. And the wife forced her husband to climb into a barrel to caulk it up from the inside. She’s standing there and showing him where … while another guy fucks her from behind. Cheerful folks. And there’s the one who pretended to be deaf and dumb in a convent. That’s the life!

Ha ha ha ha! Ho ho ho ho! Hee hee hee hee!



When are they going to settle down? First brandy, then beer, then brandy. How will he get home? How? The trolleys will stop running. So will the subway. I’ll call my mother. Or maybe I shouldn’t. Evidence. They’ll ask his mother, When did your son come home?

Phooey! He’s in trouble again. Don’t do that. Go home. Jerk off as much as you can. Until you can’t, ha ha.

Shhh. They’ve turned off the lights. Gone to bed? Bolt too? With who? Quietly by myself … Super! The terrace door creaks. Ryabets presses up against the trunk and tucks his feet in. The shadow from a nearby bush hides him. A rustle. Lidukha with the big tits. Mesropov. They stop and whisper.

“I won’t without them. Where did she throw them, the fool?”

“Over here somewhere. It’s dark, where should I look? I’ll be careful, I promise.”

“You promise but it’s my ass!”

“Lighten up, will you? I swear, I’ll be careful!”

“Uh-huh, and then it’s you and Nadya?”

“What’s with you? I didn’t invite her, you did. You and I have all day tomorrow, don’t we? When are your parents coming back?”

And he paws at her, the Chuchmek, he paws at Lidukha. He pulls her to the ground and lifts her skirt, goddamn decameron!

Ryabets goggles at the silhouettes fornicating. He feels like coming out and … kicking, kicking! Just be patient. Wait and be patient. Lidukha gives a faint cry. And Ryabets notices her look out the window. Her profile is sweet, but her eyes are harsh. That means she sees everything and isn’t going away. Why? Why? Mesropych rolls off the girl. Like a tick. Nadya spins around and vanishes.

They stand up, shake off, and leave. They close the door. Lock it. Very good. Wait.

Ryabets, crouching, moves toward the house, right where the couple was. There’s something kind of white in the grass—condoms! Two packets held together by a rubber band. Why did they leave them here?



Ryabets is standing behind the bridge pylon watching. The flashes he could barely make out a minute ago are visible now, and furious. The pinos are burning, the pinos! Like candles!

He stands and watches. Another ten minutes and it’ll be dawn. Two fire engines speed past. And an ambulance. Too late.

He descends to Novikov-Priboy Street, finds a telephone booth, drops in a two-kopek coin, and dials. His mother doesn’t answer right away, she mumbles incoherently, and Ryabets is relieved. She’s drunk. If she’s drunk, that means his father’s been asleep for a long time too. No need to hurry.

Last man standing. How powerful is that? Like Mesropych. Boltyansky once asked Zinaida Leonidovna, the lit teacher, about The Decameron. Had she read it? That idiot four-eyes exploded. “Who gave you permission to read books like that?” And Boltyansky said to her, “But it’s a classic. It says so in the preface.” “A classic?” Zinaida Leonidovna hollered. “I’ll give you a classic, Boltyansky! I worry that’s all you think about! It’s never occurred to you that The Decameron is primarily an anticlerical book. Go to the board, Boltyansky. Tell me about the images of Communists in Mikhail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov’s Quiet Flows the Don and Virgin Soil Upturned. Or should I fail you immediately? Tell your parents to come see me tomorrow!”

“You mean we shouldn’t read Balzac either, Zinaida Leonidovna?” This was Tregubov, a top student. She wouldn’t dare yell at him. “What Balzac?” She was buying time. “Droll Stories, Zinaida Leonidovna!” She blushed deeply, removed her glasses, and put them back on. “Today we will continue our study of Virgin Soil. Open your notebooks …”

Ryabets finds an open doorway and hides under the stairs. He can wait here a few hours, in the corner, and then the trolleys will start running. And the subway. Don’t cry, you’ll wake people up. Don’t cry.





THE DOPPELGÄNGER





BY GLEB SHULPYAKOV

Zamoskvorechye





Translated by Sylvia Maizell

Once there lived an actor in Moscow. For many years he performed in a celebrated theater and appeared fleetingly in TV serials. He was considered famous although he never made it as a popular icon. And this didn’t bother him in the least. It happened long ago, about twenty years or so—he had the good fortune to play a small but impressive role in a famous film about the Revolution. Eventually he settled down, having decided he’d made his mark, that he’d already been inscribed in the history of cinematography.

After that film they recognized him for many years on the streets. But without any frenzy, without their eyes popping out. Hey, look who’s coming, uh, what’s his name … And there followed the name of the character he played, since no one remembered the actor’s real name.

He lived many years alone in a tiny bachelor apartment the theater provided for him, in a Stalin-era building by the Paveletskaya station, in the Zamoskvorechye neighborhood. The theater administration had offered several times to move him to a new place on the other side of the river, closer to work. But each time the actor refused. He liked living here. Over time he had grown fond of the mysterious silence of the streets on Sundays; more and more often he imagined another life that was long gone in its sagging mansions; in the evenings, when he strolled the narrow streets, it seemed to him that this life hadn’t ended one hundred years before but still flickered—there, behind the dusty panes, behind the chipped wooden shutters. He was fond of the amusing and naïve residents of these streets, who were on a first-name basis with each other, who at the streetcar stops exchanged rumors about a maniac from the chocolate factory; about a sect that met in the abandoned church by the metro and devoured ancient ecclesiastical texts; about the corner house with the rotunda that housed a secret brothel.

And so on.

His daughter used to come from Germany to visit him here in Zamoskvoreche. She’d clean the room and stuff the refrigerator with provisions. She’d bring medicine for his chronic cold. Photos of his twin grandchildren. And then she’d be gone for a year.

He kept a photo of the twins with a stack of fan letters in a desk drawer. He’d study the identical faces with amazement and disdain, making out, through their German imprint, the features of his ancestors.

His hobby, his passion, was telescopes. Spyglasses in particular. He assembled them, with his own hands—after shows or in the morning if there were no rehearsals. He calculated angles and radii from magazines and handbooks. And distances. He’d send a list to his daughter and she’d bring him first-class German lenses. He’d fit them in a tube made by the theater metal workers (for some reasons these workers loved him). Thus a telescope on a tripod made an appearance. And he’d pull heavenly objects somewhat closer to Moscow.

What can you see in the blurry Moscow sky, where only the moon—and that with difficulty—makes its way to the viewer? Nonetheless, right after a performance, he’d rush to Paveletskaya. If the night was more or less clear, he’d sit down on the wide windowsill and sharpen the focus. Or he’d spread maps out on the floor and make calculations. He’d determine the favorable days and segments of the sky in which a constellation would appear.

And so he lived this way from year to year. He went on film shoots and tours, to festivals in Sochi and Vyborg. He took on a lover from the theater orchestra. He’d call on her at the dormitory on Gruzinskaya Street. But mostly he spent his time between the theater and the stars. Until, ultimately, this thing happened.

One March morning he set out for the laundromat, as he did every other Saturday, to drop off his underwear and shirts. The establishment was close by, two stops on the streetcar. Since on the weekends you can wait forever for Moscow’s public transportation, and since it was sunny, he decided to go on foot. He had just set off when suddenly, ringing and rumbling, a streetcar came bounding down the street.

It simply emerged from the flow of traffic and flung its doors open.

There was nothing to be done. It was fate. He was in luck. He made his way to the end of the car and set his laundry bag down. He looked around. The car was empty, except for a man in a sheepskin coat and an old woman with her grandchild sitting up front. The car started off; the mansions, like rickety old wardrobes, drifting by. Somewhere church bells were sounding—the Saturday chimes had begun. The actor closed his eyes and imagined they were riding through old, prerevolutionary Moscow, as in some Ivan Shmelev tale or a play by Ostrovsky. A hundred years ago the bells probably rang exactly the same way, he thought. When he opened his eyes, he saw that the man in the sheepskin coat was standing near the front, about to get off.

His profile seemed familiar and the actor was touched with the thought that earlier, two centuries ago, everyone here would have known each other.

Moving down the steps, the man turned around and their eyes met. The actor gasped. He saw that this man resembled him; they were like two peas in a pod.

And that, in essence, before him stood he himself—only in different clothes.

Amazed, the actor dropped his bag and a towel fell out onto the dirty floor. When he managed to stuff it back, the doors had already slammed shut. His double had disappeared. The actor rushed to the window but the pane was covered over with glossy paper. Nothing was visible through the face of an advertisement diva.

He pulled the window open and leaned out. An enormous billboard, Gold, and a yellow church fence caught his eye. That one, the other one, was standing on a corner looking right back at the actor. And again, with frightening clarity, he saw himself. His own face—familiar to the point of disgust from all the films and posters.



Well, so what? Anything can happen in Moscow. But still, thoughts of a double made him anxious. At first he drove them away, annoyed at his stupidity. He tried to make fun of himself. He laughed. He recalled many films with just such a plot. But nothing helped. The image of his double was haunting and tenacious.

What if it’s my twin brother? After all, it was postwar times. Total confusion. We were returning to Moscow from the evacuation … Mother remembered she was holding a little baby, and that he didn’t make it, that he had died … Maybe he simply got lost?

My daughter too gave birth to twins.

No, this just can’t be true.

He’d sit down on the bed and drink a glass of water from a decanter. He’d nervously stare at the hair on his bare legs. Then he’d take out the photo of his grandchildren and scrutinize it once more. With each night it seemed they resembled him less and less—because they looked more and more like the man in the sheepskin coat. From the empty streetcar.

That means people recognize him on the streets. Of course they do! They want to know how things are. They ask for an autograph. Maybe he’s an honest fellow and tells them they are mistaken. But what if he isn’t?

He imagined clearly how that one, the other one, arrives instead of him at the theater, pays visits to the flutist. And he’d throw himself on the bed, snarling into the pillow from rage. But soon another feeling began to penetrate his impotent fury—of emptiness, total emasculation, of indifference. He had only ever experienced something similar after difficult performances. When he played a role he didn’t fully understand. One he hadn’t quite entered. He felt like a coat shoved onto a hanger; it just hangs there, dangling in the darkness, completely forgotten by everyone. Dead. He’d pinch himself and pull at his hair. He’d grab the phone. But who could he call?

Not the police.

His life gradually began to take a new turn. He shifted the telescope from the sky to the streetcar stop. For hours he’d track the people clustered there in hopes of seeing the one in the sheepskin coat. For no particular reason he kept going downstairs to the store. He hung around the counter a lot so they’d recognize and greet him. If they didn’t, he’d begin to panic. He’d loiter around the neighborhood, peering into faces, and his feet would inevitably take him back to that corner with the yellow church fence and the Gold billboard where his twin, the stranger, had disappeared.

But the twin was nowhere to be found.

What’s more, they stopped phoning him from the theater to remind him of performances and rehearsals. As if they had forgotten or fired him. Once he made the call himself, but an unfamiliar voice didn’t recognize him. He got frightened and hung up. So he stopped calling. He was afraid.

A week later, he simply got in his car one evening and drove downtown.

Under the notice Today on the poster in front of the theater, his performance was announced.

So, the impostor has already taken my place.

Relieved, the actor sat down in a café and began to drink, although he had given up alcohol after a heart attack ten years earlier. Cognac, beer, vodka—he ordered them indiscriminately. He drank greedily, without a snack, gazing between glasses at the ad behind the dusty window. Your blood will save a life, a girl urged from the poster, smiling her celluloid smile.

He couldn’t remember how he got home. The smoke-filled cellar at Novokuznetskaya station and the patchy shadows, in whose company he’d swigged down vodka and belted out songs, flashed in his memory.

He collapsed in his clothes but couldn’t fall asleep because he was sick at heart. Pulling his knees to his chin, he lay there and listened to the very same sentence that kept echoing in his head. Your blood will save a life, someone’s quiet, velvety voice kept repeating.

Your blood will save a life.

He had finally begun to doze off when a thick, enveloping nausea overtook his body. It rose up like sludge and flooded his consciousness. His heart became a big balloon about to burst into pieces. So that’s how one dies, he thought, starting to lose consciousness, vanishing slowly into an airless well and resurfacing later in the darkness of a sleepless night. At dawn, coming to on sweat-soaked sheets, he moved to an armchair. Hunched over from the pain in his heart, he sat there until daylight.

Around 11 he was jolted by the ringing telephone. It was a call from the theater; the troupe, it turned out, had just returned the day before from a short tour. The director’s assistant was reminding him there was a performance that evening. “In your honor,” she flirted.

“But how can …?” he mumbled into the receiver.

“The new cloakroom attendant got it mixed up,” the woman nattered on. “Instead of Tomorrow, he put up the sign that said Today. We’ll rehearse the dance an hour before curtain, as usual.” And she hung up.

Standing under the shower, he came to his senses. He was amazed how quickly, with one single phone call, the nightmare vanished. It simply came unglued like a plastic advertising sticker and flew away in the wind. Sobered up, cheerful, he set about tidying the whole apartment. He washed the floor and windows. He dropped off his underwear, which had been lying in the corner since that day, at the laundromat. He for the first time ever phoned his daughter.

“Imagine, such nonsense!” he said, chuckling into the receiver. “I knew they were supposed to go on tour, but I simply forgot.”

“Everyone’s so nervous!” The daughter gave a Chekhovian sigh, and it was obvious she was thinking of someone else as well.

“The Irish call one’s double his fetch,” she said in parting. “I’ll send you some pills. That should help.”



That evening they gave the performance. And they say he played Caesar as never before, fiercely, implacably, desperately. In such a way that before the ovation, when the emperor exits into eternity, a pause hung in the air for a few seconds—as in olden times, when the spectator truly believed what was happening on stage.

Returning home, the actor didn’t feel his usual fatigue. On the contrary, blood was racing through his veins, his energy was overflowing. He even got out of the cab and walked home on foot, swinging his arms widely. A new life, he thought, will definitely begin from this night forward. It will be wonderful and serene. Unpredictable and clear.

Not like the one which he had lived.

He entered his apartment. Without taking off his coat, he began to wander around the room. How about going back again on the street? he thought. How about a breath of fresh air? To hell with it, how about meeting some woman, maybe even from the railroad station? Maybe go to a café, or a movie.

He stood looking out the window, watching how persistently and interminably the cars moved around the ring. Then his gaze fell on the telescope. It was pointing to the streetcar stop, as before. And rubbing his palms, he triumphantly sharpened the focus.

In the lens, two round-shouldered teenagers stood shifting their feet and spitting noiselessly. He moved the tube forward a millimeter and saw next to them a man with a briefcase.

His twin, his double. That very one.

When he ran out onto the street, the kids were trying to snatch the briefcase out of the man’s hands. An empty jar was rolling along the asphalt. A hand flashed, the sound of a dull, crunching blow. The double clutched at his face.

“Hey!” shouted the actor across the street. “What do you think you’re doing!”

And he stepped out into the road.

The impact of a car flipped him around several times in the air. He fell, and tumbling along the asphalt, he came to a stop, his arms flung wide.

Through the dark sludge that was flooding his consciousness, he was able to see his double take off down a side street. Then someone’s hands ran along his body, and he thought about the flutist, how she would undress him, caress him. But these were other hands. Fast and clumsy, a man’s hands. They dug into his pockets and grabbed his watch. Then wiped it off with disgust on the sleeves of his raincoat.

“Look at this weirdo, he’s a copy,” sounded over his ear. “Same face.”

There was some spitting and a swish of fabric. The last things he saw were two pairs of tattered sneakers retreating swiftly down the street.





PART III




FATHERS AND SONS





DADDY LOVES ME





BY MAXIM MAXIMOV

Perovo





Translated by Matvei Yankelevich

Her students hated her. For not being young, pretty, or fun. For not being different from who she was. Or they loathed her for something altogether different. Who knows what reasons people find to hate each other …

Although she was, like her colleagues in humanity, made up of 90 percent water, that water was not potable, which in a different circumstance may have, at least partially, influenced the formation of sympathy toward her in her students as well as others around her.

Dad had called her Danaë. According to her passport she was Danaë. For her students and colleagues she was Dana Innokentievna, a teacher of Russian language and literature.

She had mutual feelings for her students, not because she thought it necessary to answer loathing with loathing, but just because it happened to be so: she was hated and she also hated. A pure coincidence of feelings directed toward one another (if it is allowed that hate is a feeling).

And so, she hated her students—just as in childhood she’d hated lumps in her cereal. In essence, they were indeed lumps in the undigestible cereal of existence. And Danaë imagined herself a lump as well—big, flabby, stale. In fact, Danaë loathed the directress Gavriushkina like she loathed fish oil or boiled onions. Yet she tried to act nice. And the more she pretended, the more she loathed—her students, her colleagues, the scantily clad woman standing in front of her in line at the supermarket—yes, that very woman with the cart full of ad-emblazoned frozen dinners.

Sometimes Danaë thought with bitterness: Why don’t the terrorists take all these vermin hostage? Why don’t they get blown up? Why do serial killers pass over the directress Gavriushkina and that lady with the frozen dinners?

Danaë Karakleva was forty-seven years old. She knew that there was nothing more to come. It was all over. All the gifts she could have received had already been received. She was simply brought into this remarkable thrift store with the breath of a violated cosmos wafting through it, and they said to her, “Pick something out,” and then they locked her in, in this thrift store where everything had already been picked over. And in this thrift store with the breath of a violated cosmos wafting through it, she had spent forty-seven years.

As regards this existence’s amorous propositions, Danaë Karakleva could say the following: “I was never certain that I loved any of those not numerous men who—each in his own time—shook their fatty deposits over my trembling bosom. If Cupid ever shot at my heart, he must have been shooting blanks.”

This thesis which she had invented herself resembled fact, much more so than the rumors about her inevitable old-maid-hood. Among the large-horned herd of her students, it was commonly said in such cases: “Oh yeah? Suck this.”



She liked looking at the shower of pills, especially the round ones, that resembled squashed pearls. She liked to ride the tram past the hospital and look at the sapphire windows of the operating rooms and imagine the surgeon making a fatal error …



Danaë and her dad lived in a five-story building, erected under Nikita Khrushchev in the time of the artificial, government-approved destruction of the ark of communal living. There were more than enough such buildings in the neighborhood of Perovo, as there were in many of Moscow’s outlying quarters. They were built out of either panels the color of tubercular spit or gray-pink brick. Each of these residential buildings lacked an elevator. Outward attractiveness and interior comfort—all this was also lacking. It might be easier to list what was present in these buildings: the metastases of all varieties of cancer; staircases by which one might climb to the heights of despair, and if one were to descend it would be into pits of madness; guitar chords of underworld ditties oft performed by greenhorns fated to disappear in the sands of Afghanistan or the ravines of Chechnya. Also present in these buildings were walls that had been viciously fooled by promises of becoming supplementary scrolls for God’s commandments …

Every day, Danaë returned to this building, having first stopped at the market or grocery store; she returned with a feeling of a hole, a nagging pain, in the very center of her being …

From the Karaklev family’s kitchen window one could see the subway entrance. In the morning rush hour, before heading out to work in the nearby school, Danaë slowly downed a cup of instant coffee while examining the dark human mass. The mass penetrated the underground, shuffling from one leg to another in penguin fashion. The sleepy faces of those people—especially in the dusk of winter mornings—looked ominously similar to one another, lacking features, something like the heads of nails when viewed face on.



Danaë’s manner of speaking was as bizarre as her vision. Her speech was understood only by the portraits of the classics that hung on the classroom walls, and not even by all of them. She doubted Maxim Gorky, for one. As regards her pupils—they simply whimpered. Or cursed. Some quietly, others with full voice—depending on how much nerve they had. Danaë was kept employed by the school because she seemed rather like an animal that had been listed in the little red book. A wide-faced, warty roe deer, for example.



“As recently as the beginning of the twentieth century, the Perovo neighborhood in the south-east of Moscow consisted of a treasure trove of toxic swamps, the kingdom of poisonous mycelium, and randomly intersecting paths along which it was dangerous to walk alone …” In this manner began the oral dictation, concocted by Danaë in order to test the literacy of her pupils, who had come back from their summer vacations with their heads well aired out. It ended thusly: “And now, fuckity-suckity, here you dwell, young sluts and indefatigable jerk-offs …”

Having spoken these words in her mind, Danaë stretched her pale lips into an ambiguous smile and began dictating another text—a fake one—that had been approved by the pederasts from the Ministry of Education: “In the spring the forest is awoken by trills, drills, spills, trolls, and various other junk …”



Her daddy, who had schooled her in the art of complex linguistic expression, was dying of cancer … Yes, Innokentii Karaklev adored phrases that produced an effect. And he had taught his own daughter to adore such turns of phrase. As a result, the speech of both the Karaklevs was as out of place in the neighborhood of Perovo as a fugue for organ would be in a shawarma shack in a resort town.

Watching over her daddy’s demise was crushing. Danaë thought it unbearable to have to live and suffer watching such a thing. But damn it if she thought her life worse than death. She was convinced that she could live on, even without a future. Somehow. She wished for her daddy to disappear. Yes, to disappear, like a bout of hiccups, which, having come from god knows where, torments you for a while and then snap! it’s gone just like that, no one knows how or where. Daddy—she had thought since childhood—wasn’t fated for the grave. She rejected the idea of his decomposition in that stuffy heat and darkness. Her daddy couldn’t become a skeleton. That’s what Danaë had thought previously. And her daddy could not be turned into an urn of gray powder. But Innokentii Karaklev was dying—he emitted the smell of decomposition and his daily caprices were driving his daughter closer to the brink.

The salary of a Russian schoolteacher permits one to purchase three of the most inexpensive urns, then dismember Daddy and shove him into the urns in equal parts, and transport the urns to three different polling stations, pretending that one has simply mistaken the place to somewhere else. But the salary of a Russian schoolteacher can only nurse Daddy back to health if he has been afflicted with a foot fungus. By purchasing the appropriate ointment. Yet Innokentii Karaklev was dying not from a foot fungus, but from cancer of the innards. The chemo had made him look even more cancerlike: his eyes bulged, his back had lost its layer of fat, and touching it brought to mind the shell of a shrimp. Soon he’ll learn to walk backward, thought Danaë.

At school, many knew of Danaë’s misfortune, which went on without end. The directress Gavriushkina, with all of her predatory, livid, gloating heart, sympathized with Danaë. Gavriushkina would say to her: “Danochka Innokentievna, you should get a good night’s sleep. I’ll think of someone to substitute for you, Danochka Innokentievna …”

Danaë couldn’t bear expressions of pity directed at herself. In her mind she quickly but carefully rolled up the velvety paths of pity—embroidered with gristle and spread out before her—and having rolled up each and every one of them, shoved the scrolls deep inside Gavriushkina’s cyclopean ass.

“Thanks for your concern, Maria Petrovna,” Danaë would reply to the woman, “but I think I can manage just fine …”

“It’s clearer to one looking at you from the outside,” Gavriushkina parried. “Your beautiful eyes have lost their shine.”

I’ll show you some shine, thought Danaë, and following right behind the scrolls of velvety paths, into the back end of the directress, she stuck a metaphysical myriad of wrinkled sheets, recently soiled by Daddy’s excretions.



Sometimes Daddy liked to frighten his daughter. When she was six years old, Innokentii Karaklev told her the story of a Chinese governor who had two pupils in each eyeball. It was because of these four eyes that he had received his political appointment; Dad said that the Chinese guy lacked any other talents. Six-year-old Danaë was unable to sleep without having nightmares for a whole month. The Chinese guy visited her in her dreams and made eyes at her relentlessly.

Innokentii Karaklev had been an archeologist. Unfortunately, he’d never dug up anything worthwhile, anything for which one might win an award. All the Troys had been excavated before him. In his youth, he had planned to search out the tomb of Abel Adamovich Yahwehev, but somehow it just never panned out.

What’s wrong with me? Danaë was indignant with herself. He must have dug something up, I’ve just forgotten.

“Listen, Daddy, what was it you dug up?” asked Danaë as she changed his sheets.

“Cancer.”

“Yeah, but what else?”

“You …”

“I think it was something related to the burial mounds of the Scythians.” “Yeah, well, the burial mounds …”

“You don’t want to talk about it?”

“Why would I want to talk about it? Soon I’ll be a Scythian myself …”



Once Danaë got a call from the bank and was offered a line of credit. What the bank needed with Danaë in particular even the bank didn’t know. The one who called had a hissy voice of unidentifiable gender.

“I don’t need any credit,” said Danaë into the receiver. “My dad’s dying of cancer.”

“Forgive me, for god’s sake. Forgive me. Accept my condolences. All the best to you,” the voice poured out like a frightened fizz.

“No, wait!” shouted Danaë. “Don’t hang up!”

“Yes, yes?”

“What kind of condolences? What made you say that?”

The voice was silent.

“I don’t believe it’s possible, do you hear me? It’s just impossible!” Danaë yelled. “I don’t believe you! You cannot offer condolences, do you hear? You are just a petty, greedy maggot! I don’t even know your name, or your age, not even your gender, you son of a bitch! How dare you offer me your condolences? And where did you get my number?”

But the fizz wasn’t listening anymore. It had gone flat. Danaë hung up the phone and lit a cigarette, looking out the window at the other side of the street, where a tram rumbled past a plaza recently torn up by excavators. The plaza—pockmarked with ditches in which lay naked sewer pipes gazing at the ashen sky with their tired, rusty eyes—was empty. It was empty, if one were to ignore the statue of three orthodox nuns hanging their heads in mourning over that which could not be seen from the window, and that which Danaë could not recall, even though she walked past these nuns-in-ditches every day on her way to school.



It was cheaper to go to the market. Although daddy hadn’t taught her how to bargain. It was all for the better, taking into accent Dad’s slow demise, that double-mouthed Karaklev family had begun to consume less food.

“One Karaklev mouth is foaming,” said Danaë unconsciously to the lady attempting to sell some pig’s feet that would never know flat-footedness.



A month ago Danaë went to see a certain bastard who had been referred to her by another bastard. Both of them were medical professionals who considered themselves transmitters of veritable mercy. They rallied for euthanasia, adding that if she were to tell anyone about it, they would make her into a visual aid to Vesalius’s anatomy. The pill that would spare Dad an agonizing death would cost Danaë eight-ninths of a teacher’s savings. She remembered that day well. She was walking home from the train station, down 2nd Vladimirskaya Street. The sky was the color of boiled pork. The traffic lights were doing what they always did—preparing to break down. Flattened cigarette butts lay strewn about the asphalt like pharaohs whose sarcophagi had been jacked. Stray cats dashed away from short-order cooks dealing shish kabab on the street.

Danaë poisoned her daddy. Innokentii Karaklev felt drowsy. Danaë tucked him into bed and went to the kitchen to wait for him not to wake up. But Innokentii Karaklev did wake up. He even drank a little chicken broth. When he went to sleep for a second time and, after a short while, woke up once again. And the third time was the same. The fourth and fifth times too. So passed three days, and Daddy was still not dying. The poison didn’t tarry in his sick body: it left with the urine or the shit, she didn’t quite know which. Then Danaë telephoned the bastards.

“What did you give me?” she asked them.

“What you asked for,” was their answer.

“But it didn’t work! Three days have already passed!”

“Don’t shout. Wait awhile, it’ll work. And don’t call here again.”

Danaë began to wait. A week went by. Innokentii Karaklev was dying, but not all the way. Every day the same. He was dying, but not all the way.



She knew that two of the ninth-grade students—Chuniaev and Golotsvan—had committed a murder. Danaë accidentally overheard their lively chatter, their voices brimming with real euphoria. The boys were cheerfully, ecstatically exchanging impressions. The Creator himself, it would seem, had experienced such rapture in the first hours after the creation of the world. But these two—Chuniaev and Golotsvan—had simply murdered a bum the previous night. With the aid of the homeless man they had been demonstrating to each other various martial arts strikes and holds, and finally martial-arted the man to death. Danaë also had previous opportunities to hear about this type of entertainment of the idle but energetic youth from families who considered themselves successful. The Perovo police took on the search for the homeless-cides with some reluctance. More precisely: they began the search reluctantly and then, after a few hours, dropped it completely. The Perovo police had much luckier corpses to track—ones with relatives and square-footage.

But the corpse of that bum did not vanish without glory: it had a short but successful career as an actor in an anatomical theater. The medical students showered him with bouquets of twinkling scalpels …

She was impressed that her students—Chuniaev and Golotsvan—were not only falling behind in every subject, while also, as it turned out, committing murders. This permitted her hatred toward them to acquire some firm ground. The testosterone was jumping out of Chuniaev’s and Golotsvan’s mouths, ears, noses, and even from under their fingernails …

Once, on television, she saw a news segment about a group of students who raped and murdered their phys-ed teacher. This happened somewhere on the outskirts of the city, which Danaë, a Muscovite, could imagine about as vaguely as she could the Flemish city of Brabant. Watching Golotsvan as he shuffled at the blackboard with his hands in the pockets of his wide jeans, which were covered with chains and trinkets, Danaë imagined him, with hands shaking, hastily unbuttoning his foul-smelling pants and throwing himself at her with his horn-shaped prick. She, Danaë, is lying crucified in the tar, naked, while Golotsvan’s partners in crime hold her by the arms and legs; she struggles in their trap like a deer knocked onto her back. First Golotsvan, and then the rest of the goons, one by one, press against her with their unwashed genitalia, toss on her for a bit, then sprinkle her with what God gave them, and … experience a piercing guilt. Then, ashamed, they break her neck, or choke her with a wire, or stab her to death with penknives …

“And that’s all you deigned to learn, venerable Golotsvan?”

“I didn’t have time, Dana Innokentievna, my cat had kittens last night.”

“How many did she have?”

“Six. Would you like a kitten, Dana Innokentievna?”

“Take a seat, Golotsvan. You get a ‘satisfactory.’”

“Why ‘satisfactatory’? Please, Dana Innokentievna—”

“Take your seat.”

Grumbling under his breath, with his lower lip jutting forward, Golotsvan went back to his seat, jangling the chains and trinkets on his foul-smelling pants. His hands in his pockets. Danaë picked up a piece of chalk and turned to the board.

“Jewish bitch …” Golotsvan muttered.

Without turning around, Danaë grinned at the mouse-gray smoothness of the chalkboard. A thought came to her:What would happen if I take this here piece of chalk and on this very blackboard write something really special. Like, for example, “May you all be damned.” What would happen? Probably nothing. They’d all exchange glances and squeeze out puzzled little smirks, like lambs catching a whiff of the fire being lit under the spit. Besides, they were all damned long ago. And she was too. Danaë herself had been damned even before the students sitting in this classroom. Because she was older than them. Almost three times older. There’s your arithmetic for you, in a literature class. In the Perovo neighborhood. In a state school, in the city of Moscow, compared to which Brabant was just a pathetic little village of five houses and one toilet.



It would be natural to assume that since Danaë had a father, she also had a mother. Danaë didn’t like assumptions, particularly if they came from strangers. First of all, the mom she did in fact have at some point, she had no longer. Second, Mom loved her little Danaë for only a very short time: from zero to nine years old, plus the nine months that she spent carrying her daughter in her womb. And when the nine years were over, Mom placed a big down pillow on her sleeping daughter’s pretty little face, and then sat on top of it. Dad had lifted Mom off the pillow—and thus also off the red face of their daughter—just in time. After that, Danaë never saw her mom again. With the exception of that one time, which she had mostly forgotten: she and her dad had, it seems, visited Mom in some sort of yellow basement that smelled like medical syringes. Now, of course, Danaë knows all too well, and had known it for twenty-plus years, that the awful trick with the down pillow secured for Mom her demise in the mad house.

“Mom loves you,” Karaklev assured his nine-year-old daughter as she cried herself to sleep. “She just needs a little medical treatment and she’ll be with us again. Mom loves you.”

“And do you love me?” Danaë asked, smearing the tears with her little fist.

“And I do too,” Dad replied, taken aback that she would question his feelings. “Very, very, very much. Daddy loves his little pea, his clever girl.”

* * *

Innokentii Karaklev was becoming more and more capricious, more cancerlike. More foul-smelling. Worst of all, Daddy started to recount aloud his past life, and specifically those moments that a healthy person would not only not recall, but would actively try to forget. The long period of dying had debased him. Instead of becoming more pious, he was transformed into a cynic to a degree that is rarely found among the camp of dying organisms. This is what Innokentii Karaklev said to his daughter Danaë on that day it rained cats and dogs, such a heavy, pounding rain that the pigeons caught in it received concussions. The neighborhood of Perovo looked like a boundless, cracked aquarium into which poured the water from a thousand hoses in the sky.

“I slept with your mother. I did it with all my passion. I drilled her and drilled her and then you emerged from her belly like a wild troll from a mangled cave … Admit it, my child, from the very beginning you never liked it here.”

“No, I liked it here. From the very beginning. You’re mistaken, Daddy,” Danaë answered, listening with one ear to the hammering rain. “Fools like you are always mistaken. You’re made of mistakes. You have a fatal error dangling right there between your legs.”

Innokentii Karaklev watched the rivulets of rain running down the windowpane.

“Listen, child …” he muttered, swallowing dryly, “try to be … happy. I’m so sick of you being unhappy … I’m dying because of your unhappiness.”

“You’re dying because of cancer,” corrected Danaë, sticking a cigarette in the corner of her smirk.

They were both silent awhile, thirty-five seconds or so. The smoke from Danaë’s cigarette coiled around itself in the dark room like a scrap of seaweed.

“Do you know why I left your mother?” said Dad, scratching his sunken cheek. “Because of this one student. A handsome rogue. He was excellent at poker, had a thing for chemistry and water polo. Yes sir, my little pea, he always had jokers in store. His glass vials often exploded from overheating, and he swam in a mauve swim cap. Your mother found us—I was on my knees, polishing his … with my mouth …”

“His what?” Danaë turned to stone.

“His that!” He made a strange noise and squinted his colorless eyes at his daughter.

“Daddy …” Danaë stonily sounded out the words. “Are you saying you were a homosexual?”

An astonishing picture took shape in her mind: her dying father sucking the penis of Golotsvan, the flunk, the murderer.

“That’s how it went … sometimes. And who didn’t get into some of it? In one’s youth, in the barracks, after a bout of drinking, in one’s dreams—”

“Did you actually love my mother?”

“Yes, my little pea, yes …” Innokentii Karaklev nodded his hairless head. “You are the result of a grandiose love, a gale-force diffusion. The cells were jumping out of our bodies and mixing together. Such passion, it shook the atmosphere. Those were breathtaking, mind-numbing times.”

“And what about that student?” Danaë asked, watching the column of ash crumble from her cigarette onto the rug. “What was his name?”

“Andrei. Yes, yes. It was a breathtaking passion.” Her dad smacked his lips and purred like a cat. “Absolute diffusion. Overflowing excitement. To near suffocation. More a miracle than a passion.”

“Did you love my mother?” Danaë prodded in a steely voice. “Answer me. I don’t understand.” She now imagined her dad’s hairless head laboring over the perineum of the flunking murderer Golotsvan.

“I loved them both very deeply,” answered Innokentii Karaklev. “And about twenty others. I loved everyone. And every time it was a miracle.”

Danaë took a drag on her cigarette and fixed a vacant stare on the window. A lustful blush broke in crimson across Golotsvan’s cheeks, his eyes turning back in his head, his moans encouraging her dad’s frail, hairless head with its decaying mouth.

“And me?” Danaë asked almost inaudibly.

Her dad’s wrinkles suddenly turned smooth and he answered: “You are my little pea. My favorite book. Plus Louis Armstrong. And Fellini. Plus my favorite olivier salad. And all the Egyptian pyramids and the ruins of the great castles. You understand me? You are also the lily pads on the pond where I swam when I was just a little kid … Plus God, whatever He may actually turn out to be. My little pea. Danaë. Come here, give me a kiss.”

Danaë quickly crushed her cigarette butt in the ashtray, walked over to him on legs she could barely feel, and pressed her cheek into Daddy’s lips.

“You too,” she whispered, “dying one … Daddy …”

Golotsvan was done. But the rain in the neighborhood of Perovo wasn’t about to finish. Danaë moved to the kitchen, leaving her dad to stare out the gray window covered with heavenly moisture …

She struck him with a meat hammer, with the burled side. Danaë knew beforehand that just once on the head wouldn’t be enough. Neither would two. During the process she realized that it would be enough only when she had lost count for the third time. Then she stood there listening, without looking. She imagined a monitor with a wan green image of her dad’s threadlike pulse. Then she dropped the hammer, went to the kitchen, washed her hands, went to the hallway, grabbed her bag of notebooks, came back to the kitchen, sat down at the table, and began grading papers. After a half hour she was sick of it. She moved into her dad’s room, turned on the light (it had grown dark outside, but the rain was still pouring down), and peered at him. Innokentii Karaklev was sitting in the same armchair, but tilted over on his side so that his knuckles were trapped against the rug. His thoroughly beaten head was glazed in its own juices.

Danaë decided to leave everything as it was, at least for now, until she took a bath with some fragrant salts. Salts always had a positive effect on her body. Sitting on the edge of the tub and looking into a mirror, Danaë pronounced: “This is easy.”



Later she was told that she’d gone mad. Just like her mom. Those who said it were right. She knew it and she’d reply: “And you’re all bastards, bastards, all of you.” It’s possible that she was right too.





CHRISTMAS





BY IRINA DENEZHKINA

New Arbat





Translated by Marian Schwartz

Jacob hung there, his shoes scraping the parquet floor spasmodically. “Papa, stop!” he rasped, trying to untangle the string of lights around his neck, while German, suspecting nothing, kept pulling the garland tighter and tighter thinking there wasn’t much time left and the house decorations still weren’t finished.

There should be a comma after “tighter,” Yulia noted in the margin, then set her pencil down and rubbed her temples. As usual, the words were swimming before her eyes. They would keep swimming for another half hour, until Yulia put on her coat, picked up her purse, and left the publishing house. She put drops in her eyes. I’m going to have to move on to glasses pretty soon, she thought sadly.



As Yulia left the Barrikadnaya metro station, the heavy glass doors swung closed behind her with a loud wallop.

She heaved a distraught sigh, her head finally clearing after the stench of the sweaty underground crowd and their identical faces, on each of which she distinctly read: IhateyouIhateeveryone. Her black sweater was stuck to her body, the harsh wool bristly. What was it knit from? It pricked her armpits and back.

Yulia wiped the sweat from her forehead and made her habitual motion of smoothing down her jacket.

Her wallet was gone.

She had her cell phone. Here it was, on the right. But her wallet was missing.

Frightened, Yulia looked from side to side, feverishly trying to figure out who might have relieved her of her salary and bonus and where, when, and how.

Yulia moved forward on cotton legs and leaned her shoulder against one of the vans selling burned chebureki and sausages wrapped in pastry. Any other time the smell of the tainted meat would have turned her inside out, but the thought of the money drowned out every other consideration.

How was she going to live now?

Go to the police? Yulia laughed nervously. A lady walking by, wearing a gray puffer coat, gave her a nasty look and sent a tut-tutting curse her way. Rush back, down there, into the bowels of the underground, wrest her money back (from whom, dear Yulia?), howl …? Pretty funny.

She gathered all her strength and walked on. Toward her building.

She moved past the chebureki and pirated-CD vans, past the crazy Gothic high-rise with the gargoyle faces. She gazed, sick at heart, at one of the faces, which looked down on her haughtily. Yulia sighed and plodded on. A frigid wind whistled down her jacket collar; her scratchy black sweater wasn’t keeping the cold out. She stopped next to the American consulate, but she didn’t have the strength to take another step forward, even though it was just a few more meters to her building. A dreary line stretched out from the consulate door. Jacob took the hacksaw and, panting, began sawing off his mama’s head. The hacksaw was hard to work, and the sweetish spurts made Jacob frown … The words raced through Yulia’s mind.

A guard with a badge bore his little piggy eyes into Yulia, and his muscles tensed to lunge. Yulia came to her senses and hurried on.

She tumbled like a sack into her apartment, having begun to slump in the elevator. Now she was sitting, drained, leaning against the doorjamb, moaning softly, and tears were pouring down of their own accord, dripping on her jacket.

Her Siamese cat ran up on his soft paws. His slanted blue eyes watched Yulia carefully.

“Barsik,” she moaned faintly. “Sweet Barsik … I got robbed. Barsik. We have nothing to eat and nothing to live on.”

Barsik rubbed his round head against Yulia’s leg. And meowed.

Her phone rang. Yulia took it out of her pocket with trembling hands and pushed the button.

“Yulia darling.” It was Oleg.

“Hi,” she answered, trying to buck up, wiping away her tears and getting up from the floor.

“How’re things, my dear?” Oleg sang sweetly.

“Kind of … strange.” Yulia tried to quash her sobbing. “Today they fired our second proofreader … Mikhail Ivanich … You don’t know him. And he … he left calmly enough. But when I went into the metro … I saw … imagine, Oleg, he took a running jump right … right in front of a train.”

“What?” Oleg gasped, though there was more curiosity in his voice than concern.

“He took a running jump … He was standing in the middle of the platform … and when the train started coming out of the tunnel … he jumped.”

“Are you kidding?”

“No. Also … you know … when he jumped he knocked over a stroller … and he and the stroller … fell.”

“What was in the stroller?” Oleg’s curiosity was growing.

“A child,” Yulia sobbed. “And then … when the train pulled out … Mikhail Ivanich and the stroller were lying there on the track … Mikhail Ivanich was still twitching, but the child didn’t have a head … There was just the horrible scream of its mother.”

Yulia caught her breath. It must have been someone in the crowd that gathered who stole her wallet.

“What happened then?” Oleg asked.

Yulia felt like telling him how she’d been jostled in the crowd, how someone’s cold insolent hand had slipped into her pocket for her wallet. Not that Yulia knew exactly what kind of hand it was, hot or cold, but that was exactly how she thought of it: someone’s cold, bony, malicious hand.

Jacob started twisting her arm out of the shoulder socket but got nowhere; he hadn’t sawed all the way through the flesh …

Jacob again! Yulia was getting angry.

“Nothing,” she replied with a sigh, and got a grip on herself. “Nothing else. I feel sorry for Mikhail Ivanich. But everything else is fine.”

“Good,” Oleg said quickly. “You know, I’m hungry as a wolf! I’m on Paveletskaya right now. I’ve got some business to do. I’m selling a picture. But I’ll come right over after that.”

“All right.” Yulia nodded and ended the call. She thought sadly, So this is what we’ve come to. There was no food in the house. No money whatsoever. Yulia was one of those people who drags out the last three or four days before her paycheck and by payday has absolutely nothing left in the house.

Oleg, however, had one quirk: food. There always had to be some. And food always meant meat. Salad wasn’t food. When Yulia met Oleg Bekas at his gallery and got to talking to him over a cup of coffee with brandy, he immediately informed her of this quirk. That—dinner not being made—was why he’d left his wife (now his ex) and his infant child. The baby’s name was Sevochka Bekas and his wife’s was Marina. Oleg came home from the gallery one day and there was nothing on the table. Marina’s brown eyes stared at him guiltily as she held Sevochka, who was burning up with fever, to her breast. “Sevochka got sick,” she said. “I didn’t have time.” Oleg gnashed his teeth, turned on his heel, and left. Softened by the brandy, Yulia nodded, as if to say, Rightly so. What kind of a wife doesn’t cook for her husband? “You have to understand, I’m an artist,” Oleg explained. “I’m not some low-brow proletarian. I have the right to put myself first.” Yulia nodded.

A week later she learned from common acquaintances that on that fateful day Marina picked up Sevochka, who was still burning up with fever, wrapped him tightly in her robe, and went out to the balcony barefoot. It was snowing, and Sevochka quieted down and peeked out of her robe. Snowflakes were melting on his cheeks. “Pretty?” Marina asked. Sevochka goo-gooed approvingly. Marina climbed onto the railing, holding her son to her breast, and from there, from the sixteenth floor, to the dumbfounded looks of the group smoking on the next balcony over, she jumped.

When she first heard this, Yulia just shook her head. Foolish woman Marina. Who jumps off over men?

But right now she was ready to do the same thing. Pick up Barsik, hold him tight to her breast, and leap from her sixth floor, right in front of the dumbfounded visitors at the Metelitsa casino. Because she no longer had the emotional strength to be left not only walletless but also Oleg Bekasless.

Yulia worked as a proofreader in a publishing house. Her only connection to art was through grammar. For days on end Yulia read other people’s words very, very carefully. And corrected them. She felt like a worker who hammers a nail into a wall to hang a painting that gives off a divine light. But what kind of light does a nail give off? None whatsoever. Oleg was an artist, though, and canvases came to life in his hands. Even a sheet of notebook paper. Yulia couldn’t do that. She could only go word by word, like an infinite rosary, barely penetrating the meaning of what was written.

She fell in love with Oleg once and for all (though she had never believed in love at first sight and in her youth had often snickered at her more naïve girlfriends). With Yulia it was all very simple. Like him—hook up—go to a café—go to bed. Love? Who cared about love? As long as he had a fat wallet and a generous nature. Maybe that’s why Yulia hadn’t been through any emotional upheavals before Oleg. She hooked up and split up with a cold heart and a clear head. Like a chekist. But here was Oleg. An artist. A creator. Someone from another world where they don’t hammer nails but drink to Brüderschaft with God almighty … Yulia saw him in the gallery and fell hard. Her heart broke off and slowly dropped to the pit of her stomach.

Yulia went out on the balcony. The lights of New Arbat spread out right there in front of her. Here was a huge building with a web of lights like an open book. Here was a casino in the shape of a ship; here was another casino, and another. Expensive cars, lots of people. Sometimes Yulia dreamed of flying from her window and landing right on that ship burning with blue lights—and then sailing off to distant lands, where she and Oleg would live together in a cabin and have three children.

Jacob climbed onto the stepladder and tried to hang his mama’s head on the Christmas star, but the star was so fragile, and his mama’s head was so heavy, that … The words raced through her mind again and Yulia mechanically finished up: that the boy couldn’t hold it there and the head came crashing down, cracking loudly on the parquet floor. Yulia didn’t feel so good. Usually she didn’t remember all the words to the texts she proofread, and now there was this flood. I’ll ask them to give me a different novel, she thought. And I’ll give this one to Mikhail Ivanich … Damn, he’s gone … Everyone’s gone …

Yulia let out another sigh and looked at the clock. She had approximately an hour and a half until Oleg’s arrival. She went into the kitchen and opened the cupboard. Then the refrigerator, and then the cabinets over the sink. The old fairy tale about Roly-Poly came to mind. I’ll scrape the bottom of the barrel, Yulia chuckled to herself. Her soul was being torn to shreds.

Her search was crowned with a near-empty bottle of sunflower oil, a piece of dried-out French bread, and an almost full bottle of vodka—Yulia gave Barsik vodka compresses when he was sick. She mechanically twisted off the tight lid and sipped some vodka straight from the bottle.

Jacob sat down on the chair and looked at her intently. His blue eyes said, Come on. It’s so easy. Easy as pie. Anna fidgeted. “Maybe we can leave Thomas alone?” she asked. “Do you want to spoil the whole game?” Jacob scowled. He fiddled with the cord of his checkered shorts. “No,” Anna answered in fear. “Then stand up and do it,” Jacob said gently. “And don’t forget this.”

Compresses for Barsik.

Barsik.

Anna went over to Thomas’s crib. He was looking at his mobile. “Jake, I can’t get to him,” she said. “The crib’s too high.” “I’ll bring a chair!” Jacob responded. A minute later Anna was climbing onto the chair and looking down at Thomas. “So pretty,” she said softly. “Of course he’s pretty,” Jacob agreed. “But that’s completely beside the point.” “Yes,” Anna said. “Is the water hot enough?” Jacob inquired. “You understand what I mean when I ask if the water’s hot enough, right?” “Yes, Jake. It’s boiling.” Anna raised the kettle, screwed up her eyes, and upended it on Thomas. A piercing shriek filled the nursery.

Yulia shook her head, driving out the terrible thoughts, and took another swig of vodka. The thoughts returned.

What’s the big deal? Yulia thought. The big deal is that I would never survive Oleg leaving me.

She gave herself a good shake and stumbled into the bathroom on wobbly legs. A second later she came out clutching a mop.

“Puss puss puss,” Yulia called faintly, glancing around the room.

Barsik jumped out from behind the couch. Yulia caught him in her arms and moved out to the balcony. There she lay the cat on the tile floor. Barsik stayed there obediently, watching her with his slanted little blue eyes.

“I’m proud of you,” said Jacob. “Don’t howl.” “I can’t not howl. This is Thomas after all. He’s still little and it hurts,” Anna said, weeping. Jacob hugged his sister. He glanced at his little brother screaming in anguish in his crib with a piece of red meat where his face had been. “You see, Anna, he shouldn’t suffer. We’re going to save him.” Jacob moved away from his sister and took the screaming Thomas out of his crib. He put him on the rug. “Did you bring what I said?” “Yes,” Anna answered obediently. Jacob took the golf club from her hands. He stepped back a little and took aim. He raised the club high over his head, then lowered it with a whistle at Thomas’s head, which cracked like a watermelon.

Yulia placed the mop handle against Barsik’s neck. Then she held onto the railing and jumped with all her might on the handle. There was a crunch and Barsik’s eyes popped out of their sockets and a wheeze tore from his throat. His little pink tongue jutted out to the side.

Yulia exhaled violently and nearly ran to the kitchen to crush the grief inside her with vodka. The firewater lashed her throat. She was sobbing.

“Don’t cry, Anna,” Jacob said calmly. “They’ll buy another rug, and I tell you, they aren’t going to yell at you. Now it’s your turn.” “Jackie, let’s watch television,” Anna said. “I don’t like playing with you anymore.”

Out the window, the ship-casino was bathed in blue lights. In the kitchen, Yulia skinned the carcass convulsively, tossing the fur onto an opened newspaper.

Oleg arrived at 9 o’clock. By that time Yulia had washed, made herself up again, and put on a red dress. She was a little unsteady from all she’d drunk, but Oleg didn’t notice.

He lifted his nose, inhaling the aroma of the roasted meat. He slipped off his jacket, ran a handkerchief over his bald spot to wipe away the sweat, and as a final gesture smoothed his beard.

“What’s for supper?” he asked cheerfully, giving Yulia a pat on the cheek.

“R-rabbit,” she hiccupped.

“Excellent!” Oleg rubbed his hands and hurried into the kitchen. He sat down on a stool.

Yulia served him pieces and he ate it, crunching the bones and smiling contentedly, like a cat. The oil ran down his beard. Yulia sat across from him.

“Do you know which painting I sold?” he asked triumphantly, nodding at his briefcase.

“Which?”

“Rusty Evening!”

Yulia shuddered. Rusty Evening had been painted in blood. Oleg was so proud of his conceit—to create a painting two by two meters using only blood. He had bought syringes at the pharmacy and Yulia had given him blood in a skin ointment tube. It had made her head spin, but Oleg had been so pleased. “It’s all right,” he’d said. “You can take a break tomorrow. I have my mom and sister too.” His sister was all of twelve. Oleg was very proud of the fact that the picture had “virgin blood.” He drew human figures with it.

And now some “rich wuss,” as Oleg put it, had bought their blood.

“Listen,” Yulia groveled through her embarrassment, “since you got paid so well, can you lend me a little money?”

Oleg frowned. “I see,” he said nastily. “The female wiles are here. I know these crass women. They need money, not love.” He stood abruptly from the stool.

“No!” Yulia cried. “I’m not like that! I just … I just … They held back our pay. The crisis …”

“You have to be thriftier, Yulia,” Oleg preached, dropping back down on the stool. “Let this be a lesson to you. I can’t pay for your mistakes, understand? You have to save for a rainy day.”

Yulia nodded, scared. Oleg relented.

“Come here!”

Yulia rushed into his arms, breathing in his painfully intimate smell, realizing she couldn’t go on without him. She wanted to tell Oleg that something terrible had happened to her. But what would he say? She pressed up to her beloved’s chest. Anna and Jacob went into the bathroom. “Do I have to undress?” Anna asked again. “No need for that, I don’t think,” Jacob replied. He took the cord he’d prepared beforehand out of the pocket of his checkered shorts. “Anna, you have to get in the bathtub.” “Okay,” Anna nodded obediently. “Just promise me, Jake, that our game ends here and we can go watch television in the living room.” “I promise,” Jacob said. “The game will end …”

Oleg turned off the light and was now trying to separate Yulia from her red dress, but the clasp wouldn’t yield. Oleg growled lustfully, tugging at the zipper.

Jacob quickly tied one end of the cord around the drain grill. Anna lay down on the bottom of the bathtub. Jacob tied her neck so that there was no more than five centimeters of cord between the drain grate and the girl. “Goodbye, Anna!” Jacob said, and he kissed his sister on the cheek. “Bye,” Anna nodded. “Is this going to take long?” “I think fifteen minutes is all we’ll need,” Jacob answered, and he turned on the water.

Yulia burned with desire as Oleg ripped off her panties and bra, but she was trying to drive Jacob out of her thoughts. Oleg licked her belly, arms, and face—whatever he came across—with his hot tongue.

German balanced on the edge of the roof, trying to hold onto the New Year’s garland that was slipping through his fingers like a snake. “Jacob!” he shouted. “Jacob, help me!” “I’m hurrying, Papa!” Jacob shouted in reply, stamping his boots on the roof—and with a running jump he pushed his father off.

Oleg thrust himself into Yulia, panting and moaning. Yulia tried to get into his rhythm, furiously driving him on. Goddamn you, Jacob, her brain grumbled angrily. Goddamn those novels! Goddamn this job! Goddamn this life!

Jacob carefully mopped up the floor in the living room and kitchen. He checked the chicken in the oven to make sure it hadn’t burned, then went to his room. He looked at himself in the mirror. There was an ugly red mark on his neck. I can put on a sweater, Jacob thought. He carefully removed his checkered shorts and put on the white pants he’d hung neatly on the back of the chair. He found his white sweater in his closet and went out into the dining room, where the utensils were already neatly set on the snow-white tablecloth on the oak table. He sat down at the head of the table. It’s Christmas, Jacob thought. I’m home alone. Like in the movies.



The next morning Yulia woke up with a hangover and a nasty taste in her mouth. Her head was spinning. Oleg wasn’t next to her. Yulia rose with difficulty and walked into the bathroom. The shower brought her back to earth. She moved into the kitchen and sat down on a stool.

Life was quietly returning to her—the street noise, her neighbor’s scratchy radio, and the sound of the boiling kettle. Yulia drank plain hot water, then she went out on the balcony to clear her head. The casino-ship had turned out its lights and no trace remained of its nocturnal grandeur. Yulia smiled. Out of the corner of her eye she noticed a crowd of people below. She took a closer look.

On the asphalt, in an unnatural pose—his hands and legs turned out like a marionette—lay Oleg. Naked. Yulia blinked. Then she mechanically stepped back.

Yulia struggled for breath. She went back inside. Here they were, Oleg’s clothes. Here were his shoes. Here was his briefcase. With trembling hands Yulia unlocked it.

The briefcase was packed with bundles of euros.

It will be Christmas soon, Yulia thought. And I’m alone. With a stash of money. Like in the movies.

Jacob smiled.





THE POINT OF NO RETURN





BY SERGEI SAMSONOV

Ostankino





Translated by Amy Pieterse

He acted as though he had received a divine certificate verifying the fact of his brilliance from birth. While the other inhabitants of Literary House on the corner of Dobrolyubova and Rustaveli were plunged in a state of despondency that comes from the sense of a wasted life, my roommate, Tatchuk, lacked even a hint of that overpowering feeling of hopelessness.

Surfacing to earth out of Lucifer’s cowshed, otherwise known as the Moscow subway, on our way back to the dorms, I felt, as always, dejected, stunned by defeat. He seemed, as ever, pampered by good luck, an immutable, victorious smile on his lips. I hated Azerbaijanis, Russians, Moldavians, Jews, Tajiks, Ukrainians, blacks, and all other earthlings, forty thousand of whom passed through the vestibule of Dmitrovskaya station every day (with marble facings the color of a dried blood blister). He seemed to take no notice of the riffraff, cutting right through the crowd as though it were just a hologram image of a human herd.

“What’s with the gloomy face?” he asked as we were coming out of the underground crossing on Butyrsky Street. “It wasn’t my fault.”

“I didn’t say it was.”

“No, but I can tell from just looking at you that you think it is. Honestly, though, you can’t blame me for the fact that you didn’t have a single manuscript in your file! That, my man, is just plain bad luck.”

It was like this: the head of our university was approached by the organizers of a certain literary prize, who had requested a few examples of the more interesting manuscripts that the student body had produced. All of this (reading and submitting the text) had to be done in a matter of hours, because the deadline for novels and stories had almost arrived. They chose Tatchuk, myself, and one other student. They checked our files, but mine was empty. Unlike Tatchuk’s, which was stuffed full of work. So I missed my chance. A month later, I found out that my roommate was a nominee for nationwide fame, and a tidy little sum of money to boot.

The 29-K trolley pulled up to the stop and we squeezed into the coach, filled with scum and lowlifes.

“Cut it out,” he said, hunching up his shoulders squeamishly, shoving away the people crowding into the trolley. “If you want, I can help you get a job at Profile. Let’s go there together tomorrow, I’ll tell them you’re a better man for the job,” he suggested.

“What about you?” I said.

“Don’t worry about it. I’ll get a job in Business Primer, they’re offering a better salary there.”

While others spent months looking for a job, he always had a choice between four or five attractive offers. All he had to do was cross the threshold of an editorial office, and the woman in charge went wild. “What a sweet young man!” He possessed qualities that piqued the sexual interest of young ladies and mature matrons alike: a sharply defined jawline, the playful brow of a caryatid, the sweet eyes of an angel, with the muscular hands and other features characteristic of a dominant male. If you only knew the way the girls at the university stared at him adoringly, burning with desire to give themselves to him.

But the newly won position had no value for him, and he ignored the obligations it entailed. In fact, he never stayed on with the same publication for longer than three or four weeks. Yet each time he found himself another job without the least bit of effort, as if Moscow employers were constantly creating new vacancies just for him. It was as though he had some kind of aura about him, like some sort of mythical deer with jewels pouring out of its hooves. Indeed, I owed several good jobs to his lucky charm.

We got out at 2 Goncharny Proezd, passed the bookstore named, quite idiotically, Page Turner, past Pharmacy and Optics, one right after the other according to phonetic logic, and they were soon behind us.

“Let’s get something to eat,” he said, nodding at the neon sign over the grocery store where young writers went to buy ingredients for breakfast and dinner (individually wrapped crab sticks and a packet of mayonnaise, occasionally allowing themselves some disgusting treat like liverwurst, or a string of glossy, suspiciously natural-looking pink hot dogs). He bought a pound of choice ham, half a pound of Dutch cheese, canned olives, and two bottles of Chilean red wine.

“What do you think?” he said as we were leaving. “Isn’t it about time I started writing a new narrative, a story at least? I haven’t submitted anything in a while, and spring is just around the corner—exams are coming up. I’d like to do a narrative using the stylistic techniques of Nabokov and combine that with the magical realism of Márquez. What do you say?”

“How about the sexual candor of Miller,” I couldn’t resist suggesting. “Maybe you can work that in?”

“No, not Miller,” he said, flustered. “Intimacy is too vulgar in his writing. I would go for more refined love scenes. Nuanced, partly hidden in shadow. All of that I screwed her stuff you can save for your own writing. That’s just your speed,” he laughed. “The pornographic fantasy that never becomes reality.”

When did this begin, and why did it always happen this way? At college they called us the twins from Novoshakhtinsk. We came to the capital together, and the only time we weren’t with each other was in the bathroom. We had a deadly addiction to one another.

At last we came to our dwelling—a pale, carrot-colored, sooty, seven-floor building. You there in your faraway, big-time America, can you even imagine our Literary House, packed full of budding talents? Nope, it’s only possible in Russia: a special university dedicated to teaching young people how to put words together, minding their congruity of course. Though invisible, the nearby presence of the Ostankino TV tower can be felt here in strange ways. They say that magnetic waves coming from that accursed needle are to blame for suicidal urges among the locals. In the case of our dormitory’s inhabitants, the waves acted as a pied piper, enticing unrecognized literary genius into the realm of comfortable nonexistence. I think the whole thing is ridiculous. Magnetic fields have nothing to do with it.

Here we were in our room. An old-fashioned but functional refrigerator of a place, it sported fresh wallpaper, thick maroon curtains (that became a menacing blood-red when the light penetrated them at sunset and sunrise), a new hardwood floor, and prints of van Gogh and Bosch paintings on the walls that had been cut out of magazines by the room’s former tenants.

Having scarcely entered, he sniffed the air and said, “Hey, how many times have I told you not to smoke in the hallway outside the door? You know I can’t stand it, and you do it on purpose!”

“I was smoking by the staircase,” I replied. “But you can’t forbid other people from lighting up wherever they want. They still smoke at the end of the building by the window.”

“It wouldn’t hurt them to follow your example. Let’s rip off the No Smoking sign from the college bathrooms! We could hang it up next to our door. I’ve dreamed of getting one of those signs for ages. Hey, you could snatch one, couldn’t you? You’ve always been good at stealing random junk. Remember those books you stole from the school library? I didn’t tell on you; I took pity on you then. Why should I ruin your life? I thought. It may seem funny now, but back then it was a criminal offense. You should keep that in mind. What would have become of you if you’d been caught? Now you’re a student at an elite college in the capital, but you could have ended up in prison, a TB case coughing up blood … What are you laughing about? Cynic! You think you’re off the hook now? You think that because no one’s going to come after you now that you can take a deep breath and relax? What a fool you were, two years ago. What made you do it, anyway?”

“A thirst for beauty,” I said seriously. “I loved those books with an almost sensual passion. The gold lettering, the leather binding. And when I ran my hand down the page, I could feel every letter, like Braille to the blind.”

“You’re supposed to love women with sensual passion,” he chuckled. “Honestly, I think people like you have a knack for crime in your genes. You have the same lowly origins as the majority of people we went to school with. But you’ve done all right for yourself, you haven’t become a plebeian like the thugs back home.”

He’d had my number for half a year now, because I was guilty of childish mischief for which there was a very adult punishment. But was this the real reason I was so dependent on him?

It had all started three years before in the world of shabby apartment blocks, at our school in Novoshakhtinsk. It was a world of severe, crudely carved faces, a world of thieves, violence, and the ceaseless toil of a miner’s existence.

A world of losers and scumbags with unblinking eyes who were trained to harass the new guy, and a world in which a merciless fate awaited them: high school, then community college, the army … then working the mines after that. Beer after work, soccer on the weekends. Or a short stint in organized crime followed by the inevitable bullet in the head. One day, out of nowhere, a boil appeared on the multiheaded body of the proletariat. An alien, with its head held high and a beaked nose: my present roommate, Tatchuk. He was insultingly different in every way. His clothes made the heavy-duty pants and jackets of those around him look like rags. His perfect, eloquent speech, the squeamish way he touched anyone else’s possessions, even the inviolable, neat part in his thick jet-black head of hair.

He had everything I lacked in excess, bravery in particular, which he used to reinforce his inner me. In fact, he was almost disgustingly devoid of cowardice. Every minute of every day he had to answer the hateful stares and the all too predictable hisses (“Freakin’ fairy!” “Faggot!”). And, indeed, he answered back, with his characteristic cool laugh and that remote smile that made you want to hit him, so full of superiority and righteousness.

He said that most people were like fish, only able to live in the waters they were made for. And if one day they decided to go deeper or higher than their stipulated habitat, they would most certainly kick the bucket. Just looking at him gave me hope that I might one day rise to a higher level of society and be able to avoid certain death at the same time. We became friends, and with that the possibility of easy ascension on the social ladder dawned on me; it was something like infatuation with an older brother who always protects and cares for you. And lo and behold! Never in my wildest dreams could I have imagined that things would turn out so well. We grew close, and he told me about how awful it was to be ordinary. He made me see that the two of us were not cut out for the wretched life of our town. And I believed him, like the ancient Argonauts believed in their specially invited guest, the favorite of the gods, whose sole purpose on the boat was to attract good luck.



It was a quiet evening at the dormitory. Suddenly, we heard cries of anger, plates crashing in the room next to ours, hysterical shrieks. We jumped up, sensing a scandal brewing. In room 620, Suskind had revolted. He lived there with Samokhin. Samokhin was always having friends over, drinking, hanging out with girls. Suskind, on the other hand, was an unsociable recluse.

“Enough, I’ve had enough of this!” Suskind shouted, his features twisted. He was screeching and squealing like a pig and smashing plates. “You bloodsucking swine! It’s always, ‘Suskind, who is this and who is that, and who the heck is Smerdyakov from Dostoevsky? Oh, that’s right, Suskind!’ And then they turn on the TV. ‘Hey, Suskind, let’s root for Lokomotiv!’ I hate goddamn soccer! Picking on me because I came from Penza, almost forty years old, to become a writer. Doesn’t take much to believe in talent that’s already been recognized. You try believing in my talent! And remember my name: Sueskin, not Suskind! Roman! Sergeevich! Sueskin!”

“Oooh! What an honor,” Samokhin enthused sarcastically, and moved to pat Suskind’s softly bearded cheek.

Suskind grabbed a knife lying on the table and shook it, wailing, “Stay back!” It was pathetic.

Fights are not a rare occurrence in our dorm. In the spring, tormented by lack of love, insignificance, and hopelessness, the bastards throw themselves out of windows. This whole place is permeated with reminders of the ever-present temptation of suicide—grates on the windows of the upper floors, metal nets stretched across the stairwell. The problem is that there are too many of us here. There are five hundred of us from every corner of this enormous country, five hundred losers, each one thinking he’s a genius. Five hundred lonely voids, living hand to mouth on miserly government scholarships sent here by our parents back home. Only a few crazy geniuses and two dozen literary hacks would make it in the world. The rest are doomed to a life of total obscurity and wretchedness.

“You don’t know the half of it, you guys,” said Samokhin, when we had come out into the hall. “At night he tries to communicate with martians, honest to god. He says they want to take him away with them. Beam me up, Scotty! He could sink a knife into me at any minute, if his aliens told him to. As Samoilov wrote, if I remember correctly, ‘This city is full of crazies, at least one in three is psycho. So speak to me softly. I might be one of them …’”

“‘Don’t be so sure that you’re so smart,’” I finished. “‘And I wouldn’t jump to conclusions about which one of us’ll come by a sharp razor first.’”

“So, Dima,” Samokhin said, addressing Tatchuk on a different topic, “do you think you’ll be the one who gets those five thousand greenbacks?”

“Who else but yours truly?”

How could he be so certain? It was as though his rich childhood imagination was furnished with its own personal universe that revolved around him alone (with a map of the stars on the ceiling and an army of teddy bears dedicated to their master). And then this perfectly polished cosmos expanded to the size of a three-room apartment, streets, schools, entire countries—and there was not one place his parent’s love, backed up by their financial means, could not reach him. The outside world seemed to fulfill even his most extravagant desires. And so my roommate, who was used to all this, seemed to be able to force reality to conform to his expectations of it. This was, I suppose, his greatest gift of all: he made the whole world into a big-budget stage production in which he, Tatchuk, was the princely heir and future ruler. All other people were his servants—faceless minor characters whose only purpose was to serve their master and then disappear from his sight forever. In this world, respiration was the only thing that couldn’t be counted on: my roommate suffered from chronic asthma, and was sometimes forced to use a fabulously expensive inhaler.

Back in our room, bare-chested, having uncorked a bottle, he surrendered happily to the nightly ritual of self-admiration. I bet nothing gave him as much pleasure as parading around the room with no shirt on. He could spend hours in front of the mirror, studying his own loving reflection in different perspectives and poses, enjoying a glimpse of his muscles, beautiful knolls beneath his satin skin. His narcissism was natural and justified, but it still got on my nerves.

“Just look at this six-pack,” he said to me, stroking his washboard belly deferentially. “Here, touch it. No, come on, touch it! Touch it!” he insisted, indignant that I should take such a criminal disinterest in his amazing abs.

I left the room as if to go out for a smoke, trying to avoid this cruel form of sexual harassment. And I came face to face with Suskind, homeless like myself.

Oh, how lucky I was to have him: my guardian angel, the great and invulnerable Tatchuk! Ever since that train on the way to Moscow, when my bag was stolen with all my money and my passport. I was devastated. I wouldn’t be able to register or sign up for classes. And then he came back (he’d left the compartment to throw out some garbage) and handed me my wallet. He had found it miraculously, in a trash can, with no money left in it, but my passport still inside. “What would you do without me?” he said. “I return you your name, your identity, and your future; don’t take it for granted.”

And so it went. Then there was the editing job at Architecture and City Planning magazine that paid three hundred dollars a month—money a provincial freshman could only dream of. The police trainees who found a crumb of hashish in the inner pocket of my canvas backpack, but who for some reason decided to let me go at the last minute for the ridiculous price of fifteen hundred rubles. The photo of us together on the first page of a glossy magazine, under the headline Our Future Is Everything. Not to mention the girls who flew toward Tatchuk like moths to a flame, and—praise the lord!—sometimes even bestowed their attentions on me. All my successes, all the publications, all the ills I managed to avoid were due to his presence at my side. It was with the greatest horror that I imagined what would happen if this deity were to turn away from me.

I went back to the room.

“Haven’t you had enough of pounding those keys?” he asked, nodding at my ancient computer. “I need a new story too, you know. I already have a great name for it: ‘The Point of No Return.’ What do you think?”

“What is it about?”

“I still don’t have it all planned out yet. Basically, it’s going to be about two friends living in Venice. One is an aristocrat, although no longer wealthy. He works as a model for the leading fashion designers and writes brilliant poetry. The other is Gorlum. He is but a pale shadow, wracked with envy for the unending successes of his friend.”

So that’s what’s going on, I thought. Our companionship, which had seemed not so long ago to be at least a kind of symbiosis, was now a glaring case of vampirism. Poor fool that I was, I had thought he had no ulterior motives for sharing his unending supply of good luck with me, that he did so with the same sunny generosity of all demigods. O the wretchedness of my soul and its innate servitude! I felt like the lowly lackey allowed to sit at his master’s table, only to be thrust back in his place when the meal was over.

“So one day Gorlum decides to kill his friend. He thinks that by killing the first character, let’s call him Martin, he’ll solve all of his own problems, and at last fortune will come his way. But when the cunning plan is enacted and the murder has taken place, Gorlum realizes that his life has lost its meaning after Martin’s death. Gorlum goes crazy. He starts seeing features of the master he so cruelly betrayed in different people walking by on the street. He starts running up to them, calling them by his friend’s name. He begins to believe that Martin is still alive, and punishing him through his absence. It ends with madness … What do you think of the story line?”

So you think that my only purpose on this earth is to be your monkey, a mere dwarf in your court, Martin dearest?

“I feel I’ve heard this somewhere before,” I said automatically.

“You’re always doing that!” he exploded. “And when it concerns your own writing, you go hoarse defending the originality of your ideas. Have you ever thought that maybe the reason your work doesn’t get printed is because you aren’t capable of generating any original ideas of your own?”

“What about your work, why hasn’t it been printed?”

“You’re a lazy, ungrateful loser.”

Like a greyhound on a leash, I began to quiver in anticipation of a fight. Now, finally, I knew what I wanted. I wanted to see fear in his eyes. But it wasn’t so much fear as doubt that I was hoping for. I wanted to see him doubt his absolute right to demand and receive whatever came into his head.

“Listen,” I said, lighting a cigarette and trembling with the suspicion that had so suddenly awakened in me, “your plot is all right, but it seems sort of unrealistic to me. I suggest you make a few changes.”

“Don’t smoke around me, you slob, have you forgotten? Put it out this instant!”

“In my opinion,” I continued, inhaling, “talent seems to be distributed unfairly between your two characters. As a matter of fact, the story just doesn’t seem believable or lifelike. One character is blessed so generously—as handsome as a god and as brilliant as Dante … Of course that happens in real life, but in a book it would appear too contrived.”

“I said put it out!” He lunged at me, but began coughing, then snatched his inhaler, biting into it with whitened lips.

“On the other hand, if brilliant Martin can’t put two words together on paper and is tormented by creative futility, it’s a different matter altogether. The premise of our story is destroyed instantly; it has a deeper meaning.”

Wheezing, he hit me, and I struck him back. I saw before me a sheep ready for slaughter, and with every blow I was hammering the sense of life’s imminent end into him. All of a sudden, he gave a sharp start of surprise and threw his head back. I saw a fish that had fled the waters it was meant to inhabit and would end up floating to the surface with its belly torn open. I saw him as he was, weakened and made vulnerable by his own good luck, fed with its gifts to the point of surfeit and decay. His life, which had always ascended to new heights as though following a brilliant railroad track, had reached its apex and was now plummeting downward. I stood there in front of him, tempered and honed by defeat. I was used to it, just as a wolf is used to hunger and cold, and my face showed the coarseness and impenetrability of a pagan god.

“You’ll pay for this!” he threatened, rubbing his broken nose, but it sounded as though he had merely sighed. Something had happened to him that was too serious and too deep to be manifested on the surface as a cry of protest or the convulsive shudders of limbs that refused to obey. I had hit him in his weakest spot, damaging his hermetically sealed protective armor. A cosmic chill, pitilessly indifferent to the reality of any single human “I,” came rushing in through the air vents, filling my roommate’s soul with the understanding that from now on, nothing was certain. God, he implored, could this really mean that I’m one of you guys now?



After that, my roommate kept his mouth shut for a long time. And I got to smoke without leaving the room. As soon as I appeared in the doorway, he would stand up and leave. The devil knows where Tatchuk was spending so much of his time every day, but I heard some students say they had seen him walking alone down Rustaveli, past the stereotypical gray buildings, whose color leaves a sickening aftertaste of electrolytes, copper, rotten eggs, and the thick stench of burning rubber. He was out there alone in an antechamber of hell—not one with the splendor of purifying flames and endless volcanic eruptions, but one that was as cheerless and intolerably ordinary as an old cast-iron tub with a bunch of spiders crawling around inside if it.

With each passing day I felt my own life force becoming stronger as the vitality of my roommate ebbed. His female superiors at Profile, who had once so adored that “sweet boy,” now demanded preliminary proof of his literary abilities and assigned him a test essay on “Why Smoking Is Good for You.” That definitely got the better of him.

Rumor had it that doubts had been raised among jury members as to whether Tatchuk was, in fact, the author of the novel he had submitted. It was too mature, and too perfect. The piece far surpassed the abilities of a twenty-year-old. Without fuss, the jury thought it best to put forward a more humble candidate as winner.

Next, out of the blue, Tatchuk’s parents refused to continue their generous financial assistance. It was then that the real reasons for his coming to study at our understaffed school in Novoshakhtinsk came to light. His parents had divorced. Both now had other families, and other children too.

The female students’ once limitless admiration of Tatchuk evolved into little more than the ill-concealed fear with which one notices a crazy person on the city streets. He had become timid and unsure of himself, always muttering something incoherent and foolish under his breath.

The name itself, Tatchuk, suddenly appeared no more than a mess of barbaric consonants. As though, lacking any other more suitable phonetic material, God had nailed together a magnificent church using the debris from an old wooden outhouse. How different than my own last name—Bessonov—a name that has been generally acknowledged as that of a future classic.

Besides, to be honest, I just couldn’t be bothered with Tatchuk anymore. There were too many circumstances and events taking shape that were totally independent of him. I felt vaguely sorry for him, so far away, out there on the periphery of my needs, fears, and hopes. First of all, I’d fallen madly in love with a she-devil I met at the All-Russia Exhibition Center. Her beautiful face was enough to make my throat constrict like it was in a gentle noose, and my soul feel like it was being tickled by a dog’s wet nose. Things were pretty much hunky-dory—riding the monorail together and the stuff of mushy romance like going up to see the view at Ostankino Park and Sheremetyvo Palace—until the day my sweetheart crossed the threshold of our dormitory room. By the time Tatchuk got back, my girlfriend already had her hand beneath my shirt and was brushing my lips with her own. So I have to say that my neighbor couldn’t have chosen a more inappropriate moment to return. He sat down at the table with us, and I poured him half a glass of wine while my sweetheart continued, unperturbed, where she’d left off. As I allowed the nimble tongue, which might as well have been forked, to enter my mouth, I glanced at Tatchuk’s tense, stoney face and sent him one last silent Sorry.

“Dirty whore!” he hissed, so that we jumped apart from each other. He stood up quickly and started rushing around the room, yelling that he didn’t have to tolerate such animallike indecency in his own room. “Get out of here!” he cried. “If you don’t leave, I’ll go to the dorm supervisor!”

I shot up, doubling my hand into a fist. But when Tatchuk started coughing and groping for his inhaler in his pocket, I relaxed without touching even a hair on his head.

After I returned from walking her home, Tatchuk spoke to me for the first time since our fight.

“I’m in trouble,” he said, with obvious difficulty. “It looks like I’m going to be kicked out of school.”

“What makes you think that?”

“Don’t pretend you don’t know what’s going on. If I don’t hand in at least one new story by May, Urusov will expel me.”

Well, I guess now is the time to confess everything. Tatchuk’s writing had suddenly become remarkably bad. “It’s weird,” students would say. “How did he manage to write that brilliant narrative his freshman year? Maybe it wasn’t his writing at all. What do you think?” My only answer was to chuckle vaguely and shrug my shoulders. What was I supposed to do, tell the whole world that I was the one who had scribbled down the notorious story for Tatchuk? That I was the one who had helped him along, correcting and rewriting most of it? We were fast friends back then, and I was totally convinced he had the golden touch. It was like we gave each other strength. I told him how to put words together, and through him I could stop feeling like such a loser. He made me feel like I, too, was somehow invincible, important, like we could make it if we stuck together.

“No,” I said, “I’ve had enough of this. Do it on your own.”

“I can’t,” he muttered.

“If you can’t, you should transfer somewhere else. It’s not my problem.”

“I don’t want to study somewhere else. I won’t make it there either.”

“Do you want to be a writer or not? Anyway, that’s beside the point. Do you really think Urusov is such an idiot that he hasn’t noticed anything? Just a couple of days ago he mentioned that our styles are strikingly similar. Get it? One more pretext is all they need to kick us both out of here.”

“Please, just one last time!” he implored.

“Yeah, right.”

“Then I’ll just tell Urusov what happened, and you’ll get expelled. If you write me another story, you’ll at least have one more chance.”

“Fine,” I said. “Go ahead and tell him.”



He stopped his pleading, but I had a feeling he was planning something. Just sharing a room with him became nearly intolerable. I had only just been able to stomach the royal, all-powerful Tatchuk of old, but this new one was simply too much to bear. He turned from a generous, merciful god into a backbreaking burden. His eyes followed me beseechingly. Where could I hide when we spent at least six hours a day together?

My instincts had not deceived me. Only a week later he pulled a stunt that had me itching with such fury that it took me all day to cool off.

“A month ago you broke my nose,” he announced calmly. “The nasal septum was damaged, as a result of which I now have trouble breathing. Furthermore, my nose didn’t heal properly, and now no one wants to be friends with me.”

I stared at his unchanged nose. It looked fine to me: protruding, patrician, as always. Still, my roommate did look rather sickly. His cheeks were sunken, his eyes glassy with dark rings beneath them.

“I am in desperate need of plastic surgery. The operation costs ten thousand dollars. I have no one else to turn to. If you refuse to help me, I will have you thrown in jail. I will sue you for inflicting severe injury on me, and I have documented evidence to prove my claims.”

“The money’s over there,” I said, nodding. “In the top drawer of the desk. Exactly ten thousand.”

“I’m not joking. Have your parents sell their apartment. You should understand that my life is being ruined because of this. I have no other choice. Mark my words, you’ll be doing time.”

A nose injury, blown out of proportion into a worldwide conspiracy that cannot be proved or disproved—as long as you believe in it, it’s true. But why was he indulging in this eccentricity, and what did he really need the money for? Was it a bribe? For whom? My god, could he really be so desperate as to believe that this fantastic sum could help him rise from the ashes? For us ordinary people (dorm dwellers), it would have been no more consequential than a mosquito bite, but for him it was a mortal wound. For the rest of us, unemployment, lack of money, obscurity, was the air we breathed. For him, it was a sign that his life was over, once and for all.

“You listen to me!” I shouted. “One more word out of you and I’ll fix your nose for you myself, right here! Have your parents sell their apartment and shell out the cash to you! Or are you an orphan now?”

“My parents are unable to give me any money,” he answered hollowly, as though his parents had died yesterday.

“And why is that?” I asked in surprise. “You are family, after all. And you’ve had it easy for three years, living off the money they send you. So what gives?”

“My parents are busy with their own lives now. They got divorced, and I got left out of the picture, so I can’t ask them for help anymore.”

“But you think you can ask me for help?” I exploded. “Ten thousand bucks doesn’t just materialize out of thin air, you know! What do you want it for anyway? To go to America? Or invest in Gazprom stocks and become a millionaire in six months?”

“I’m warning you, either you come up with ten grand or I’m taking this case to court.”

“You can take it to the war crimes tribunal for all I care!” I stormed out, slamming the door behind me. What was I going to do with him? And how much longer could I keep this up, treating him like a normal human being? Get a grip! If we could sit down and have some vodka together, I might quote the words of a poor, homeless Russian poet who died in exile. He said, It is cold to walk the earth; still colder is the grave. Remember that, remember, and do not curse your fate. He wouldn’t get it though. It would be like trying to explain that bread is bread. Somewhere deep inside, I knew: he was losing it. Something had to be done, an alert had to be sounded. The problem was that while his old swagger had not made him many enemies, it did little to win anyone over to his side either, so his fall was met with a general apathy. I was the only one he could count on. So I decided to go back in there and talk to him. I decided to say, Come on, don’t do this to yourself. You are healthy and strong as an ox! You’re young and bright, well-educated and good-looking. You could be out there having fun and living life to the fullest, and you choose this instead?

I went back inside, only to find him standing over my computer. I yelped like a wounded animal and rushed forward—but it was too late. With one press of a key, he had consigned my best piece to oblivion. Half a year of tense and difficult sleepless nights … I’ll kill him! I grabbed a ceramic vase from the table and threw it at him, aiming for his head. I missed, and it crashed through the double-paned glass window. Then I went straight to the dorm supervisor.

“But you boys come from the same parts, don’t you?” the supervisor asked me. “Why are you squabbling with each other? I don’t have room vacancies at the moment. If you really want to move, I suggest you ask around. Maybe someone will agree to swap roommates with you.”

Nobody wanted to swap with me; no one was willing to share a room with Tatchuk.



Each morning the sheets on my bed were twisted into a hieroglyph suggesting torturous insomnia. The reason: that maniac had acquired the revolting habit of getting up in the middle of the night and shuffling around the room like a somnambulist. My nerves were wound tight as strings, and it was like Tatchuk was pulling a bow across them. I always had the feeling that he was getting up stealthily, tiptoeing toward me. Perhaps with a pillow or razor in hand. I stayed on my guard, waiting for him to strike from behind. I think we both needed help. I found myself having to copy all the files in my computer onto discs that I secured in the desk drawer under lock and key. Things can’t go on like this for long, I told myself. But it didn’t get better. It just went on and on, in the same way.

Once, as I was returning home, I heard him through the door talking to someone on his cell phone. (It must have been his grandma—she was the only living soul willing to listen to his harping.)

“… I filed my claim in court,” he was saying. “He can’t wriggle out of it now. You wouldn’t believe how long it takes them to consider a case! I can’t wait any longer. And guess what? That pitiful wimp managed to land himself a job as a copywriter at a publishing house. He’s making five hundred dollars a month. Oh, and he has a book coming out soon. But I won’t let him feel good about that when my life is such a mess. I want him to live in a state of constant fear. And I’m pretty good at acting insane. I think he’s going to break down and help me soon. My life might be a mess right now, but that’s all the more reason for him to have to suffer as well.”

I went cold with fury. Whether in a healthy state of mind, from hatred toward me, or out of crazy envy of my latest successes, he was like a tick that bit deep into me and wouldn’t let go until it had drunk its fill of my warm blood. They say you can’t teach an old dog new tricks. That may be so, but today Dr. Bessonov is going to have to use a little shock therapy. I’m going to show him something that will make his latest strategy vanish—poof!—into thin air.

Late that evening, when Tatchuk left for the bathroom, I got hold of his inhaler and hid it in the top desk drawer. Then, after hesitating a moment, I locked the drawer and threw the key out the window.

“Sit down, we need to talk,” I said as he came in the door. “It’s time you went home. I’ve had just about enough of you, my friend. So I suggest you gather your things without a big fuss and go back to Novoshakhtinsk. I came clean and told Urusov that I’d been writing for you. The old man told me off a little, but said the papers for your expulsion would be signed in a few days.”

“No, you couldn’t have!” he cried. “I need my education …” Then he underwent a sudden transformation. He drew himself up straight and puffed out like a turkey, as though his sense of dignity had returned and was flooding him from within. He started pacing the room, and I watched him in his agitation. I experienced a cold, predatory curiosity, a sense of my own strength and the ease with which I could simply crush him like a louse.

“Tatchuk,” I warned, “you had your chance.”

He started coughing and turned toward me, jerking spasmodically. His face had gone purple, and his eyes were large and beseeching like a saint on an icon, or a bull in a bullfight. At first he didn’t understand, as he knocked over mugs and glasses on the table, searching one surface and then another, grabbing at things, incredulous at not being able to find his priceless Swiss fix.

“What did you do with it? Did you take it? Give it back right now! Come on, give it to me … Be a man about it … It hurts, it really hurts. It hurts to breathe, I can’t. Seriozha, man, I’m sorry, what do you want? I’m going to die, please. I’m sorry, I’m sorry.” He was wheezing and sputtering, then he coughed out a few more words. He started to lose his balance, took a step toward me, then stumbled. He had to lean on the desk for support, and his hand seemed to go through the wooden tabletop like water.

I continued to sit there, ringing with numbness, as though I were not myself. I behaved with the same sweet aloofness with which a cruel child dissects a bumblebee on the windowsill, probing it’s fuzzy belly with a needle until it spurts white pus like a ripe pimple. I found myself at the point of no return, where love is silent, and it was as pleasant and painful as returning to the cramped unconsciousness of the womb. Suddenly, as though I’d been yanked by the hair, I started at the seriousness of my insult to the world, and I slapped myself on the forehead. What am I doing? I snatched a kitchen knife and rushed to pry open the lock on the flimsy desk drawer. I fumbled for the miserable spray and rushed to my roommate’s side.

“Come on, come on,” I coaxed, “you don’t have to be talented or smart or honest or good. It’s enough to just be alive. Who are we, anyway, to refuse one another the right to exist?”

A day later, his body was found in a toilet stall in the left wing of the building. He was clutching an empty bottle of sleeping pills. By some cruel twist of fate, his body lay prostrate just beneath the words You’re useless, which someone had underlined with a thick marker.



When a person loses someone close to him, it is common that he will feel tortured by a sense of responsibility toward the dearly departed. Friends give speeches in his honor. A bright, whitewashed image of the deceased is created, purified by suffering, which has little to do with the living person you yourself knew. This was exactly the way we, students of the acclaimed professor Urusov who gathered in the courtyard of the dormitory, recalled one who was truly talented, who suffered deeply in crisis—a vulnerable soul whom we ignored, abandoned, and paid no attention to, focused as we were on ourselves. Not that a long time was spent mourning. (It was, after all, the heat of May: sticky leaves rustled in the trees, and the hot air was as thick as the rubber ball we took with us to play soccer at Savelovsky station.) It had already been suggested, as though by chance, that there was no reason to torture ourselves because of someone else’s frivolity and that the fellow himself was to blame. “It was so obviously his own fear of living,” another colleague said.

I stood there trying to find the point from which we could go back to the past, but anger, or envy, or soul-killing apathy had numbed the senses, and, picking us up like chips of wood in a flood, had carried us toward the finish line. I couldn’t find this point, or even picture it. And, more out of a sense of duty, not yet believing in the true, unparalleled reality of a higher judgment, I sidled off furtively, away from the others, mumbling silently under my breath, “God forgive me.”





PART IV




WAR AND PEACE





THE COAT THAT SMELLED LIKE EARTH





BY DMITRI KOSYREV (MASTER CHEN)

Birch Grove Park





Translated by Mary C. Gannon

That dude, by the way, he never took his coat off,” the girl told me. “For the first time in my life I did it with a guy in a coat. You know, an old coat, pretty gross.”

A coat in the middle of a hot, stifling Moscow summer? I began to understand my client, the mother of this underage creature. When a girl gives way to her fantasies to such a degree, her friends can deal with it. But not her mother. To the mother, a child will always be a child, even if that child has developed a habit of talking about sex with a definite world-weariness. That’s when I get a phone call that goes, Doctor, can you tell me if a normal person would think something like that?

But, whereas you can lie to your mother and enjoy scaring her, you can’t deceive a shrink. A professional will easily be able to detect whether an overripe teenager is merely fantasizing, or fantasizing while fervently believing in the fantasies, or simply …

Simply telling the truth.

“Did you tell your mother about that? About the coat?” I asked in a gloomy tone. “Do you realize that a normal person would never believe that? Look out the window—the concrete is so hot it’s melting—and you’re talking about a guy having sex in a coat. It wasn’t a fur coat, by any chance, was it? Think before you tell your mother things like that. Or do you want her to pack you off to a mental institution after this?”

“Oh, so that’s what this is all about,” she said, and examined me with a long look. “Is that your diagnosis? All right, then. Let’s go to the loony bin. Just let me grab an extra pair of pants, and off I go.”

She waved her palm over her head in a circular motion imitating the flashing light of an ambulance.

Most of my income (not reported to the IRS) comes from single mothers who refuse to believe that their children have grown up. Not just grown up, but grown up to become coarse and ugly, so that if they’re boys they contemplate throwing their mothers facedown on the kitchen table. And if they’re girls, their mothers suddenly become spiteful, idiotic obstacles to achieving very concrete physical desires.

It’s one thing when these are classic teenage fantasies, even if they border on pathology. (And they always border on pathology.) What I had just heard, however, was something completely different. Her eye movements, the tone of her voice, and the internal logic of the story attested to the complete absence of any fantasy. Yes, she said she’d do it with that guy for five hundred rubles in Birch Grove Park, which stretches from the Polezhaevskaya subway station to Peschanaya Square. Yes, she went with him to the end of the grove and waved a condom she’d pulled out of her pocket in front of his face. And then she was smelling the earthy, moldy smell of the gray overcoat, or even more likely a raincoat, that the man never took off in spite of the heat.

“He could’ve killed you, you know,” I reproached her.

“He was all right,” she said very convincingly. “Just wanted to get laid. Then again, I picked him. For his eyes. He had such—”

“Remind me how old you are?”

“What? So what if I’m fifteen? Does that mean I’m too young to want it, huh?” She opened her eyes, thick with makeup, very wide. “Oh, I’m sorry. I didn’t know. My mom forgot to tell me.”

“Okay, let me give it to you straight,” I said woodenly. “If you’re not careful what you tell your mother, she’ll end up in the funny farm, not you.”

“Good riddance,” replied the young creature in a sweet voice, and stared with disgust at my untrimmed beard and my baggy turtleneck sweater.

“Hold on a second. That means that I end up without a client, which isn’t good for my business. Your mother needs professional help, not you; she’s the one who called me, crying frantically and saying, ‘Can you take a look at my girl? She tells me horrible stories. Is she crazy?’ We need to calm your mother down or she’ll be off her rocker in no time. Not you—her. Get the picture? So here’s the deal: you made the whole thing up. I’ll think of something to say to your mother. I’ll say that you’re fine for now, though you need to be under observation. And you keep your mouth shut about sex in coats. And at the same time you’ll tell me about this guy—dude, that is—who goes around dressed like that in the summer. To tell you the truth, I’m more interested in him than you. Because who needs maniacs wandering around the streets of Peschanaya?”

“Mister, you’re a maniac yourself,” said my client’s daughter, clearly enjoying herself. “He was a big, tall, funny guy, nice, with kinda faded hair. Still pretty young. Tan, like a construction worker or something. Maybe he’d just gotten out of the hospital and that’s why he was wearing a coat. A weird coat.”

“Oh, so now it’s a weird coat, eh? Well, tell me more about the coat.”

“The material … I’ve never felt anything like it before. It wasn’t synthetic. Gabardine, or twill, or something else great-grandmotherish. A long coat down to his ankles. Big buttons. You know, like from a museum. Yellowish edges. And it smelled like it’d been buried underground for a hundred years. But the dude wasn’t a bum. He was clean. I wouldn’t do it with a bum, no way! You kidding? The dude himself smelled really nice, actually.”

“Girl, just listen to yourself. You walk down an alley, see a man sitting on a bench wearing an overcoat … Okay, you think he’s been in the hospital, but still … And so what do you do next, tell me again?”

I paid great attention to the pupils of her eyes, her body language, the movements of her head and shoulders.

“Nothing. I saw the coat, saw the dude. I wanted to get some action, so I batted my eyes at him and blushed like a schoolgirl.”

“You are a schoolgirl.”

“Well, I’m overdeveloped. So the rest is history.”

I sighed and made a mental diagnosis. Teenage hypersexuality and an underdeveloped personality, with no pathology in my area—psychiatric, that is. I also realized that the girl’s desire to torture her mother was spent for the day.

“Okay, to sum it up: you made the whole thing up and you’re not talking about it anymore. Mom gets some peace of mind, and you, young lady—if you start seeing weird things, or if life starts to suck real bad all of a sudden, give me a call. I’ll fix it all up for you. I mean it. We’ll deal with the money thing later, a little bit at a time. And weird things need to be sorted out quickly.”

“Dr. Weird,” she said, and cast a sad glance at my sink filled with dirty dishes.



I walked to Birch Grove Park to get some fresh air and hide from the heat. And just to think a little.

After sunset, the squirrels went quiet in the branches of elm trees. Disappointed spaniels and dobermans hauled their owners back home; but pensioners remained seated in their usual spots, finishing their games of dominoes.

I peered across the park that was slowly succumbing to darkness. The girl hooked up with that dude somewhere not too far from here, and they went to most remote spot in the grove, which still hadn’t been cleared of fallen trees after the disastrous storms of 1998. A person with an underdeveloped personality simply has no clue what a stranger wearing a long overcoat in hot weather can do to her.

Uh, wait a second—according to her, he hung the coat over his arm while they were walking, but put it on again before he laid her down on a concrete slab, took the condom out of her fingers, and rolled up her miniskirt.

She didn’t make that up—that much was certain. So if this was the case, it was the guy who worried me. It seemed like more than just ordinary fetishism.



The local police station was located on 3rd Peschanaya Street, on the other side of Birch Grove Park. The precinct was a hole in a wall, splotched with shiny brown paint. The hole opened onto a short corridor that led down to a semibasement room, decorated in the best traditions of Brezhnev office style: cheap wall panels of faux wood, wrinkled linoleum imitating mahogany flooring, and painted white bars on the windows.

“Sexual predators? No, haven’t had any of them in here in a long time,” said the inspector with the fitting last name of Bullet. “It’s good you stopped in, but I don’t see a crime here. Okay, she’s underage. She was hitting on him. No law against wearing an overcoat in the summer. Got anything else on him? No? Okay, I guess I could ask around. At least I’ll be able to get off my butt, get some exercise. Come back in a week. You’re a private doctor, I guess you know what you’re talking about,” he concluded skeptically.

And only three days later …

The flashing lights of the police car cast an unnatural blue pall on the gray stump of a body covered with a blanket. The figure lay on a stretcher that floated slowly into the yawning mouth of the ambulance. But I caught a glimpse of tangled hair and a wet forehead amidst the absurdly blue uniforms of the orderlies. Her face was uncovered, so she was alive. Inspector Bullet gave me a dark look and said, “The reason I asked you to come right away was that if she dies, I’m gonna have to interrogate your underage client. There’s an overcoat here too. Looks like it’s all true.”

“I’d rather tell you her story myself,” I said, thinking hard. “It would make more sense.”

“Well?”

“Nice guy, funny, youngish, sun-bleached hair, tan, tall?” I asked.

“Far from it. Not very tall. The overcoat he wore dragged along on the ground behind him. The victim says the coat was strange, like something from the Stalin era. Other than that—well, maybe he was tan, maybe funny. Why shouldn’t he be funny? So much fun to bash in a girl’s head. They’re probably gonna have to drill a hole in her skull. They say it’s that serious. She went with him on her own at first, and then later she suspected something wasn’t quite right … Yep. That’s about it.”



The investigation reached a dead end very quickly. Two construction workers, migrants, one tall and one short, who had been painting the building on the corner of 2nd and 3rd Peshchanaya Streets, vanished into a thin air. This greatly surprised their foreman, who couldn’t locate his countrymen after returning from Moldavia. To find their whereabouts or prove anything was virtually impossible, since the photographs of the suspects that were soon faxed from their hometown, a place called Yassy, were only suitable for a trash can. So the building with the unfinished paint job returned to its peaceful slumber among the sticky lime trees and sounds of car alarms.

“We can’t issue ‘wanted’ posters or arrest an overcoat without its owner,” said the inspector. “But you know what I think? I think this is your department. After you stopped in the other day, I called all the old geezers from our precinct. They’re better than any archive. Thought maybe there had been something like what you described two years ago, before I began working here. Turned out there was a case in 1973. Right here in Birch Grove Park. Then again, where else would someone work the walls with a girl? So there was this sex maniac who wore a wide-brim hat and an old-fashioned overcoat, who was always on the lookout for schoolgirls. Funny thing was that the girls didn’t even hesitate. He took them to some broken-down barracks near Khodynka and made them wear white socks and a school uniform with a white apron. When he got busted, he threatened that the entire police force would have hell to pay when they found out who he really was. He hinted that he was some big shot in the Communist Party, or even one of the higher-ups in the government. To make a long story short, instead of going to jail, he ended up in a funny farm—your department, in other words. Never came back from there. He’d be in his nineties by now, I’d say. And he was a local, not a construction worker from Moldavia. Period. Case closed … What do you say to that?”

Quite frankly, I couldn’t say anything at all, except a few standard comments about fetishism.

But fetishism isn’t contagious. Especially when there’s no direct contact. And fetishists rarely choose the same location twice.

Lighting up a cigarette, I sat down on a chair on the balcony and put my bare feet up on the railing. I had thought that I lived in one of the best neighborhoods in Moscow. Right next to the Sokol subway station and the large triangle of Bratsky Park, with its stately old lime trees. The park ends right at a lane of chestnuts, straight as an arrow, bordering an elegant square. That lane runs up to the famous Birch Grove Park, as big as a small forest. To live in a place surrounded by trees and green parks—what more could you wish for? Well, for one thing, that there weren’t sexual predators roaming around in them.

But what could I do? I had (along with Inspector Bullet) very odd facts at my disposal. There was not one, but three maniacs, all strangely attractive to underage girls. The girls followed them willingly; my young patient even seduced him herself. Only one of them put up any resistance; but even she followed him voluntarily at first—a man she’d never seen before wearing an overcoat. She went with him to a remote, deserted corner of the park. And it was only when they got there that something happened she didn’t like.

So, three maniacs. The second was short, since the coat dragged on the ground. The first one was taller; the coat only came down to his knees. And the third maniac was already history—also featuring an overcoat, however.

If there’s only one overcoat, then two different people would have had to wear it. As for the two builders from Moldavia, one of them could have just borrowed it from the other, and … and interesting things began happening to them.

But what about the 1973 maniac, who also wore an “old-fashioned overcoat,” for god’s sake? Old-fashioned even in 1973? When was it in style, then? The ’50s? ’40s?

The cigarette smoke drifted over the tops of the poplar trees, behind which stood gray brick buildings that looked like gingerbread houses. The clicking of a woman’s high heels, fast and nervous, resounded on the concrete somewhere below.



The next day I went to visit the inspector with a silly question: had they found any link between the 1973 case and today’s pedophiles from Moldavia? But, of course, there was no link. And, of course, no one wondered back in 1973 what had happened to the gray overcoat that the sex maniac wore to go skirt-chasing. Inspector Bullet had read in the 1973 file that the maniac had had a whole underground bunker, like an abandoned bomb shelter, right on the edge of Birch Grove Park. The police might have kept the white socks or the coat; but only the socks would probably have made good material evidence.

“What about the bunker?” I asked. “What happened to it? Where is it?”

“Who cares about the bunker, doc? When we come across a place like that, you know, a basement or an attic, we just seal it up and check the locks from time to time. So that winos or bums can’t live there. I’m sure that was what happened to the bunker. Sealed up and forgotten. Come on, let’s go. I’ll show you why we have Comrade Stalin and his minister of internal affairs, Lavrentiy Beria, to thank for a good cop shop.”

“Why Beria?” I asked absently, lost in my own thoughts.

Inspector Bullet didn’t answer. Instead, he proudly motioned me to follow him down the corridor, where it ended at a plywood door. He opened it, revealing another door behind it. This one was made of heavy, rough cast iron, painted blood-brown. It had something like a ship’s steering wheel, two feet in diameter, attached to it. No, it wasn’t a ship’s wheel—it looked more like the lock on a bank safe. I was standing in front of the door to a huge safe, the height of a grown man, covered in a slapdash way with multiple layers of paint. Numerous iron levers and knobs stuck out of the door—all parts of the locking mechanism.

“Does it work?” I asked in a grim voice, staring at the magnificent contraption.

“You bet,” said Inspector Bullet. “We have the key, it weighs almost a pound. But frankly, none of us has ever felt like going behind the door.”

He paused significantly, enjoying my confusion.

“No mutant rats or skeletons in rotten trench coats there, though,” he added shortly, and wiped his large face with his hand. “But I suggest you don’t go in there, either. Because … well, doc, I guess you’ve figured out this is an entrance to a bomb shelter. And our station is like the front lobby of the shelter. We’re on the corner of Peshchanaya Square and 3rd Peshchanaya Street, right? We go into the bomb shelter from here, and using underground passages we can walk all the way over to the lane of chestnuts on your 2nd Peshchanaya. Think there’s not a bomb shelter in your basement? It’s just locked. But if you go down into the basement, sooner or later you’ll end up in front of a metal door just like this one here. And behind it you’ll find a passageway all the way to the Sokol subway station, or even the airport station, where the old airport use to be, on the former Khodynka Field. There was a secret subway line that went all the way there from the Kremlin. So, you go for a stroll underground, and when you figure you’re lost, you start banging on this two-foot-thick door from the inside. But no one’s going to open it, because even if someone’s there, they won’t hear you. It could get lonely, don’t you think? Especially when it’s pitch-black in there.”

“You think Comrade Stalin and Comrade Beria wandered around in these bomb shelters?”

“Well, maybe they didn’t. But all the gray brick houses on all the Peshchanaya streets have these bomb shelters. They were built by German prisoners of war. You know, ‘You bombed ’em, you rebuild ’em.’ They say that in the ’50s, when Khrushchev set them free, they thanked everyone here for giving them the chance to return home with a clean conscience. And Comrade Beria, in addition to being the minister of national security, and then the minister of internal affairs, was also head of the prisoner camps. So it was all under his jurisdiction. The best buildings in Moscow are called Stalin buildings, but they should be called Beria buildings.”

“That’s all well and good,” I said. “Beria and company—very interesting. But are you going to catch the maniac?”

Inspector Bullet sighed and looked at me unsympathetically. “At least the girl is alive. She says when he laid her down on some mossy hill, she changed her mind. And then he asked her to put on white socks, like a schoolgirl. Just like the other maniac. She didn’t like the socks—too dirty. She began to fight him off. That’s it. The case is basically closed. Not gonna dig up anything more on him.”

“A hill … on the edge of Birch Grove Park, right by the concrete fence at Khodynka Field,” I said with sudden clarity. “And who took her there? It was probably him. That’s his place. Or their place? The same place as in 1973? And at first she followed him, as if … as if she were hypnotized. Right. See you, inspector; I’ll be back.”

“Hey, come work in the police force, why don’t you? We really need a shrink in the department,” replied Inspector Bullet.



The girl, Julia, gave me a much warmer welcome than her mother. The mother probably wasn’t too keen on paying me for another session. She just sadly gestured with her hand toward the girl’s room, saying, “Don’t be shocked. Her majesty’s wearing new clothes.”

The red-haired Julia had dyed her hair jet-black and put on black and red lipstick. Metal trinkets of all shapes and sizes dangled from her wrists. A metal cross hung between her large breasts, which were virtually spilling out of her T-shirt, and were spotted with pimples.

“Come to lock me up in the funny farm?” she asked.

“They don’t put goths and heavy metal fans away in mental institutions,” I said. “Now listen carefully, sweetie. Two days ago, a man in an overcoat stinking of dirt cracked open the head of a young woman. The police are looking for him. Do you catch my drift? You have the ass of a grown-up woman and the head of a teenager. And when someone lowers a rock onto a head like that, and the brains begin to—Did you say something?”

In one quick, nervous motion, the gothic Julia lit a cigarette and stuck it to her mouth. Then she took it out, smeared with lipstick, and stared at me silently.

“So I need you to fill me in on some details, here,” I said hastily, before she had quite recovered from the shock. “First, who was leading who? He you, or you him?”

“Him,” she replied immediately. “He took me to the cement fence.”

“You said there was a concrete slab. Was it hard?”

“Don’t worry, it was soft enough for my butt.” She was herself again, the first wave of shock already past. “It was covered with moss or something. It wasn’t concrete, I mean … it was really old, more like a tuft of something in the ground. To the left of the path leading to a hole in the cement fence by Khodynka, the field. So it was real soft. Try it yourself. If you need company, I’ll come with you. Doctors get a discount.”

“One last thing. When you were going there with him, what were you thinking about? What did you feel?”

“What do you think I was thinking about? I was thinking about that,” said Julia. “I felt a little high. I was like, you know, a little girl. Real curious. Like it was the first time. A big guy with a big thingy.”

“Did you think those thoughts before?”

“I used to do a lot of things before. And now—hello, grown-up world.”



I headed to the concrete fence, behind which the white towers of a whole new residential district, constructed on Khodynka Field in just under a year, soar up to the skies. The tops of the buildings bask in the sunset, and the fresh new walls glow pink, like the Cadillac Hotel. To the left stands the spire of Triumph Palace, the tallest residential building in Europe.

But all that is on the other side of the concrete fence. There, in a forgotten area of the old park, which is essentially a forest, twilight was thickening. An empty bench stood askew (what was it doing there—did someone drag it all the way over from the lane?), and weeds and burdocks grew on the tufty ground. Like gray mushroom caps covered with green mold, and slightly protruding from the ground at about knee height, there were two concrete slabs disappearing into the ground at a slant. A little farther on was another slab, level with the earth around it.

I thought I could make out something resembling small orifices, half covered in earth, by each slab. Passageways that once led down?

The slabs were covered with shards of broken bottles, sausage wrappers, and … a torn piece of foil—a condom wrapper.

So this was the place.

I had nothing more to do there.

Gray haze and a soft path silenced my footsteps. A shaggy dog emerged quietly from the bushes and stared at me with an unblinking, almost human stare, keeping a safe distance. Then it took two steps toward me. My heart fluttered in fear, but the the dog didn’t come any closer.



For two hours I listened to a plump editor from Sokol, the local newspaper. She had suggested I do an interview on the topic of psychiatry, because “we do this with all the prominent people in the district.” Then she talked about those who had died on Khodynka during the coronation of the last czar, when many people were crushed and their bodies were hauled away on carts. About Peshchanaya Square, which was built on a large graveyard for Napoleon’s soldiers. The remains of the French soldiers were taken away, nobody knows where. A similar story about the dead in Bratskoye Cemetery: they were buried during World War I, and their remains were exhumed under Beria and Khrushchev, when the remote suburb of Moscow was turning into a beautiful new residential district. The bunkers on the edge of Khodynka? Those were located in a special area that belonged to the Moscow Military District—part of the defense line at the farthest end of the airbase. Airplanes took off over the heads of soldiers, their propellers droning heavily, and flew further west, to the railroad. Nothing interesting, apart from that. Stories about the living dead from the past? No, no; nothing of that nature. I would have heard. I left the editor and walked home through the empty treelined streets in complete silence, greedily breathing in the fresh air.

Parks built on human bones. Graveyards that no longer exist. An ominous name—Khodynka. More parks, couples with baby carriages, cyclists, poplars, lime trees. Graveyard shadows sleep peacefully among bushes and alleys. Sleep, O souls of long forgotten soldiers. Sleep in the best neighborhood in Moscow. You are welcome here, because all cities stand on the bones of the past. Carts, then hearses, rolled down these streets. These days, from the open balcony doors, you could hear women’s laughter and music, and from the sidewalk you could see the tops of bookshelves and white ceilings with circles of honey-colored lights cast by chandeliers. A cat sat in the window and stared gloomily at the gray concrete below. The cat’s name was Grymzik. He belonged to my neighbor, and I was almost home. And I needed to make an urgent phone call.



“Sergey? Hi, how’s your precious health today?”

“Ah, good doctor! Nice to hear your voice. I’m great, actually. Physically exhausted, but glowing with mental health. I’m afraid I no longer make a very interesting patient. You’re a regular magician, I’ll have you know.”

“Believe me, Sergey, no magic involved whatsoever. What was it that bothered you? Depression and a couple of neuroses. Well, who wasn’t depressed in the ’90s? I used to have two patients who loved to discuss the benefits of suicide and its various methods with me every day. I didn’t try to contradict them, and even participated in their discussions. What do you expect from someone who’s been designing rockets all his life, and is then told: Thank you, but we really won’t be needing any more rockets. Rope and a piece of soap is the only way out. And you … half the people in the U.S. take Prozac; and they had no major crisis or economic collapse to contend with in the ’90s. So there’s no magic to it whatsoever. But you should hear about my new patient. You won’t believe it if I tell you. Actually, that’s why I’m calling you. Do you still have your connections in the archives?”

“Oh, I never lost them. Still work there. Deputy director, if can you believe it. So the entire archive is at your disposal. What exactly are you looking for?”

“Well, you see, it’s a very serious case,” I said, improvising. “A fetishist, a rapist, most likely a murderer. Fixated on particular objects, locations, and events from the past. And particular names. I have a theory, which I thought you could help me test. Just promise me that you won’t think I’m off my rocker when I start asking my questions. You wouldn’t believe what kinds of nutcases there are out there.”

“Indulge me,” said the archivist joyfully. “What particular historical fetishes does your maniac have?”

“Coordinate number one is the area between the edge of Khodynka Field and the back of Birch Grove Park. Apparently, that part of the city is connected with some important people. And I’m talking famous historical people—from the Soviet era. Some bigwigs in the ruling party. Then there’s a fetish, which is a summer coat, or an overcoat. Light gray, no belt, made from good material, like gabardine, worn by a man of above-average height. Do you think you could help me determine the exact era and style of an overcoat? It would help me figure out who he’s fixated with. Because the bastard wouldn’t tell me. So, the overcoat is coordinate number two. Then, since we’re talking crazy people here, there’s one peculiar detail: with him it’s all about underage girls—white socks and all that nonsense. And that’s your third coordinate. So, what do we get at the point of intersection?”

“Well, doctor, you’re an intelligent man. You know your history. It’s not what; it’s who. Some concrete historical figure. But I’m curious. This guy—does he wear the old-fashioned overcoat and rape young girls in white socks?”

“Sergey, don’t ask questions. Who’s the psychiatrist here? Yet, indeed, you guessed it. Only the particular location is also significant here—the back of Khodynka Field and Birch Grove Park.”

“But of course, my dear doctor. Let’s begin with the overcoat. It’s probably from the postwar era. In the ’30s, the fashion was to wear military-style overcoats with a belt. Then, after that, up until the ’60s … Well, take the photographs of the Soviet party during that muddy period between Stalin and Khrushchev, and you’ll see about five overcoats like that in every picture. As for underage girls, it’s perfectly clear. I’m sure you know who was infamous for meddling with them.”

“Beria,” I said under my breath, looking down at the dark treetops from the balcony. “Lavrentiy Beria.”

“That’s right. Of course, other party leaders have been know to savor similar worldly pleasures; but schoolgirls were Beria’s particular preference. Well, not just schoolgirls; often women with specific figures and mannerisms. Am I using the correct terms?”

“Absolutely.”

“Imagine a black car driving slowly along the sidewalk behind a girl with plump calves. Two men get out of the automobile and introduce themselves to her. According to some sources, they just push her into the car and drive off to the famous house on Sadovaya Street. Across from Krasnaya Presnya, in case you didn’t know. Other sources suggest that the scenario was a little more genteel. They would talk the girl into it first. If need be, they’d dress the teenager in a school uniform, or sometimes a ballet tutu. Then they sat her on a sofa and told her to wait. Dozens of books have been written about it; and just two months ago, some TV people approached me about it. They’re going to make a program. Have I told you anything you didn’t already know?”

“The particular spot,” I reminded him. “Our entire district was built by Beria. I know this already. He, of course, always took off from the airport on Khodynka; but other people boarded planes on the other side of the field. What does our maniac know about that other, forgotten part of the field? And what does that part have to do with Beria?”

The archivist took a deep, noisy breath. “He knows something that very few people know, frankly. And I find it strange that a maniac could get his hands on such information. It’s extremely difficult to come across. What’s on that side of the field now?”

“A construction site. Just like every other goddamn neighborhood in the city … New buildings crawling up to the skies all over the place.”

“And you want to know which building stood there before?”

“Can you tell me this over the phone?” I asked after a pause.

“Yes, after Mr. Suvorov’s novel The Aquarium, I can,” the archivist reassured me cheerfully. “The Aquarium, the main intelligence directorate of the Red Army, stood there. Around it were various military fences, barracks, even tents, when the troops were training for the parades on the occasion of the Bolshevik Revolution. The area belonged to the military, in other words. That wasn’t much of a secret. The secret, for a long time, was what was there underground.”

“Do you mean catacombs, bomb shelters, underground tunnels?” I recalled the heavy metal door with the spindle wheel.

“That’s exactly what I mean,” said the archivist. “Back then they were building bomb shelters everywhere, and Beria was in charge of it. In the summer of 1953 they took him into one such bomb shelter at the far end of the airfield, just after Comrade Stalin died. That was where he spent his last days. How long exactly is difficult to say. They say that they executed him first, and prosecuted and sentenced him later, in December. It’s possible, by they way, that he was executed in that very basement, right between Birch Grove Park and Khodynka Field. The site of his final orgasm, as it were.”

“From the point of view of psychiatry, it’s interesting that you would refer to an execution as a last orgasm,” I said pompously. “Would you be so kind as to explain what you mean in more detail?”

“Doctor, not everyone’s a maniac. Could you hold on a second? I’m going to go grab something … here. A memoir of someone who loathed Beria with all his heart. For various reasons. The Bystander, by one Mr. Dmitri Shepilov, minister of foreign affairs under Khrushchev. He was also in charge of culture, arts, and ideology in the Communist Party. He was, by the way, a handsome man who loved women. Ordinary women, mind you, not underage schoolgirls. The chapter is called ‘The Battle.’ And I quote … hold on a minute, I’m going to quote him where he talks about where they put Beria. ‘And when he was told he was under arrest, his face turned green and brown from his chin to his temples and up to his forehead. Armed marshals entered the meeting hall. They escorted him to the automobile. It had been earlier agreed upon that the Beria would not be put in the internal jail in the Lubyanka or the Lefortovo detention cells: that could lead to unforeseeable consequences. It was decided to keep him in a special detention cell in one of the buildings of the Moscow Military District under surveillance by armed guards.’ He’s referring to your Khodynka; or, rather, the farthest end of it. Later the military closed some of the buildings there and gave them away. Oh, and here’s the part about orgasms: ‘He persistently from the depths of his memory recalled the most erotic scenes and relived them, voluptuously enjoying all the little details, in order to excite himself, seeking oblivion for at least a few precious moments. The supreme officers who guarded the door of his cell all day and night could see through the peephole how Beria, covered with a rough military blanket, writhed underneath it in spasms of masturbation.’ What style, doctor! Note, however, that I wasn’t quoting from the book. I was quoting from the original manuscript that I received from one of his publishers. Even though this was way after the Soviet era, the publishers had scruples about printing the piece about the military blanket, so they left it out.”

A blanket, I thought. A military blanket. And clothes.

“Sergey, do you happen to know if they confiscated his clothing, too, after he was arrested?”

“Clothing? My dear doctor, not just clothing. Shepilov very clearly states in his memoirs that they they took away his shoelaces, his belt—even his famous pince-nez, so he wouldn’t cut himself with the glass.”

“And where did they take it all?”

“Oh, I wouldn’t know. Does it really matter? I doubt they would have kept that information in the archives. Although, it’s possible they might have written it all down in some official document somewhere.”

On the other hand, I thought, it doesn’t really matter. I imagined the military investigators fingering every little wrinkle of a light gray overcoat and then … then tossing it in some corner … and then …

Suddenly, I heard my mother’s voice in my head. When was it? How many years ago did she tell me about the cold day in June 1953, before I was even born? It was a story about her and my father. They were sitting alone on some stone steps by the river, cigarette butts floating past, next to a tall Stalin-era building on Kotelnicheskaya embankment. They must have felt very happy on that short June night, when the sun rose almost as soon as it had set. They felt happy until the stone steps began to tremble under their feet.

Because tanks started rolling down the boulevard next to the embankment.

And my father—who had run off to fight in the war as a boy, and who ever since had been able to tell the difference between tanks on their way to military parades and tanks going off to war (portholes shut tight, armaments at the ready)—got up from the stone steps to watch. Then he went back to where my mother was and said somberly, “I think I’d better run home.”

But it wasn’t war. It was Marshals Zhukov, Nedelin, Mos-kalenko, and others, getting ready to enter the Kremlin and arrest the omnipotent minister of national security.

And arrest him they did. The troops under Lavrentiy Beria’s command did not rise up in his defense. The door to the dungeon at Khodynka slammed shut behind him.

A cold, cold summer in 1953. A summer coat. An underground bunker that looks like a bomb shelter. Its roof, covered in moss, disappearing into the ground.

“Hello? Doctor, you still there?” said the voice on the other end. “I could tell you things that have come to light in other documents just beginning to surface nowadays. For example, Beria’s not the only one to blame for the purges and execution of prisoners. After the war, he was involved in the A-bomb and nuclear power (glory be his name), and construction, and a number of other things. There were people whose hands were just as bloody as his. They were the ones who assassinated him. Are you interested in hearing more?”

“I am,” I said honestly, “but not now. I have a crazy man walking the streets. Thank you very much, Sergey.”



What happened after 1973 in terms of maniacs in overcoats? Nothing, really. They were dormant. Why was that? And why has that suddenly changed? I remembered the construction site, all the dozens of new houses that had risen up in the past few months on Khodynka Field. The large wasteland of the former restricted airfield was no more. It was crawling with …

Construction workers.

Construction workers clambering up and down the stairwells of the new buildings, dumping garbage by the surrounding fences, excavating … and excavating some more for the foundations of new buildings.

I had one slim chance left, and I used that chance the next day.

Because the foreman of the defunct brigade of two vanished construction workers from Moldavia was still occupying a lone structure in the next courtyard.

“So they’re not coming back, eh?” I asked the foreman, and sat down on the porch next to him.

He shook his head furiously.

“Too bad,” I continued. “Say, uh, they borrowed a book from me… about space invaders. You seen it?”

“No,” replied the foreman mournfully, and again shook his head. “Haven’t seen it.”

“I understand.” I was moving closer to my goal. “I just need the book. It’s the cops who need the rapist. But the book is still mine, you see—”

“My guys are no rapists. They’re good guys,” the foreman said, finally able to muster a coherent sentence. “The book … go ahead and look around. There’s no book in there.”

I could hardly believe my luck. I went inside the little house where the construction workers had stayed. A strong, unpleasant odor from a portable toilet assaulted my nostrils. Then, in an instant, I saw a dull gray garment hanging on a coatrack right in front of me.

The rest was easy.

“By the way, I need to do a paint job,” I said. “This thing here, is this your work coat? How much do you want for it?”

“That’s no work coat,” answered the foreman. “The guys left it here. You can have it. Instead of the book. Go ahead, they won’t be needing it. They’re not coming back. Their families keep calling and calling …”

Holding the gray overcoat at arm’s length, I asked: “Where did you work before? Wasn’t there a construction site over there? On the other side of the field, by that concrete fence? I believe that’s where I met your guys.”

“Oh, sure,” said the foreman. “The finishing team arrived when we were done over there. And we moved here. And now … we’re done here too.”



I remember at one point I felt the urge to bury my face in the coat and inhale the smell of a cellar and potatoes. It took me some effort not to do so. I threw it down on the landing in front of my door. I had no intention of bringing the thing into my apartment. I went inside and found a large shopping bag, put the overcoat in it, and left it in front of the door. Then I scrubbed my hands thoroughly. In a closet I found a bottle of flammable liquid for barbecuing and dropped it into the bag as well.

I was in a hurry. It was getting late, and I didn’t want to leave the coat outside for the night. Someone might take it.



Then I was in that deserted edge of Birch Grove Park. An empty bench, and the remnants of the bunkers protruding from the ground.

I dumped the coat onto the surface of the nearest bunker, on the concrete slab covered with moss. I poured the liquid onto the coat and set fire to it with my lighter. Thick, oily smoke billowed up and gravitated to the concrete fence and beyond, where the floors of the nearby buildings mounted into the sky.

It burned very, very slowly.

“Now why did you do that?” The thin, tremulous voice came from somewhere below.

No, I wasn’t scared. Even when I noticed that someone had been sitting on a nearby bench the whole time. It was … an old lady? That’s right, just an old lady in a light summer coat and a funny straw hat trimmed with two wooden cherries. The red paint on one of them had almost completely peeled off. But her cheekbones burned with the same color, in an almost invisible network of blood vessels. When I saw those liver spots on her powdered cheeks, I thought in panic, How old is she? Why didn’t I notice her before?

Or maybe she hadn’t been there when I set fire to the coat?

“Do you think it’s about the coat?” the old lady asked in a childish—no, not childish, but teacherish—voice, high as a violin string. “It was just fabric. Good fabric too. Very durable. That was silly. Just plain silly.”

“No, it’s not about the coat,” I replied through my teeth. I had to say something, just to break the silence—and so I wouldn’t be afraid.

“You haven’t even seen him,” the old lady continued, not paying any attention to my words, and staring vaguely in the direction of my sneakers with her light gray eyes. “You weren’t even born yet in ’53. Not to mention before that.”

“Did you see him?” I asked.

“Just like I see you now,” the voice went on. “Only closer, much closer. As close as can be.”

And slowly, very slowly, she parted her thin, bloodless lips.





EUROPE AFTER THE RAIN





BY ALEXEI EVDOKIMOV

Kiev Station





Translated by Mary C. Gannon




“What’s the story on your pal?”

“He was born, he suffered, he died.”

—Dialogue from Heist, a film by David Mamet

If you ride out from the center of the city on the Filevskaya line, a minute before Kievskaya, the train, whistling and puffing, slows down and emerges out into the light on the subway bridge. Your eyes try to take in the sharp bend in the river, the angular, protruding architectural ruins along the embankments, and the broad flat façade of the White House, its flanks a bold invitation to gunfire from weapons mounted on tanks.

On this day the picture seemed to be smeared like bad reception on a TV screen with whitish rain showers, frequent and driving. I frowned and hunched my shoulders, anticipating the discomfort, but when I crawled out from underground into the station, it had already stopped. The darkened asphalt breathed out a bathlike moisture, passersby shook off their umbrellas fastidiously, and the returning sun was multiplied in puddles.

I glanced at my watch and walked down the street, slowly making my way over to a fountain that looked like the remaining evidence of the recent shower; I wanted to turn it off. Some people had already sat down, sticking backpacks and plastic bags under their behinds, on the steps of this stunted amphitheater. Others peeled off their jackets or simply shook the water from their soaking heads; this hot spot for the young filled up quickly. I remembered that I had waited for Yanka here; I remembered that, stretching my hood as far as it would go and trying to light up underneath it, I had regretted my choice of meeting places. When the St. Petersburg girl had finally arrived, I took her to the new pedestrian bridge, where we blended in with other couples.

Together with them we staggered through the stuffy glass passageway from one side of the bridge to the other—I pointed with my finger, explaining that this was probably the only place in the city where you could see, more or less up close, four of the seven Stalin skyscrapers at once. Nodding at the MID building with a coat of arms on it, I explained that according to the original design it was to have been the only one without a spire. At the last minute Stalin announced that it looked too much like an American skyscraper that way. It was too late to change the design—the building was almost finished; but who would be the one to contradict Stalin’s wishes? So they ran a gigantic metal rod through the top floors, and placed a ridge-roofed tower on top of that, painted to look like stone. After Khrushchev unmasked the cult of personality, he was reminded that it wouldn’t be a bad idea to remove this idiotic detail of Stalin’s gloomy legacy. Nikita snorted and ordered that it stay right there, as a monument to the tastelessness of the generalissimo.

On the left side we moved onto a path that led along a high, grassy slope past the Turkish embassy toward the Borodinsky Bridge. Europe Square was now below and opposite us.

I like this place.

Here, the river and the open space in front of Kiev station leave a large expanse open to view. Here, you can really see the sky, which is rare in this capital city that squeezes you between enormous stone slabs. The view that spreads out before you here—the Gothic silhouette of the university on a distant bluff to the left, the palisade of mighty pipes on top of the Radisson, the spire of the Hotel Ukraine perpendicular to layers of lilac clouds—is one of those typical and utterly urban landscapes that create the face of a city, which Moscow, monstrous and vague with its eroded individuality, so lacks.

That’s what I said to Yanka, trying to show her the city from its most presentable perspective, trying to be amusing and casual, not pressuring her. I knew my role and my place. When I met her a year before in her native Petersburg, I invited her out of politeness (but not only that, not only …)—I invited her (that is to say, them, her and Igor) to “visit us in our capital with no culture,” promising to show them around and entertain them. Of course, they didn’t jump at the opportunity—not because they had anything against me, but because in the absence of any other attractions in the city, the prospect of hanging out with me was not sufficient inducement to overcome a distance of six hundred kilometers. Then, suddenly, Yanka found a reason—the wedding of a college friend. The event was to take place over several days (the newlyweds belonged to circles that had money to waste on lavish parties). But the other guests weren’t really to Yanka’s taste; and that’s when she remembered me.

Exceedingly pretty, with a slight, charming unevenness in her features, and with that rare combination of intelligence and spontaneity, that balance of self-assurance and sincere goodwill that you sometimes find in people from very well-to-do families—smart, prosperous, and affable; that was Yanka.

During those three days, I mobilized all my meager resources of joie de vivre and sociability. My guest was as open and friendly as ever; she listened attentively and meekly tasted the shark at Viet-Café, but on the whole she seemed fairly indifferent. As I later became convinced, people who feel that they are equal to life’s demands don’t experience an excess of curiosity about the range of its phenomena: they already know exactly what they need from it.

I had absolutely no chance of ever landing on the list of things that those people wanted from life. Back then I hadn’t abandoned my rock and roll efforts. Officially, I was supposed to be a journalist, which is how I presented myself (I was a freelancer). I was also acquainted with progressive, and sometimes even high-profile people; and I was, after all, a Muscovite. Theoretically, I belonged to practically the same circle as my female contemporary from the Petersburg theater crowd; the sense of insurmountable social and psychological distance was completely unfounded.

I felt not only a distance, though—I felt an abyss. In our relations, which seemed on the surface to be relaxed, there was something reminiscent of a conversation in the lingua franca of a Norwegian and a Malaysian who sit side by side on a flight in a transcontinental Boeing; however well-disposed they might be toward each other, they are still from different worlds. At that time, a little over four years ago, I had only begun to guess about the nature of that difference.

Yanka’s generosity of spirit, which so impressed me at first, gradually began to disturb me. It was difficult, if not impossible, for me to share a perspective in which the world appears to be acceptably, if not optimally arranged.

I became suspicious of Yanka’s self-sufficiency. I understood perfectly the origins of this feeling, since I’d had the opportunity to glimpse from afar the reality which the girl had inhabited for a long time already—the reality of her beloved theater, where she was highly regarded, with its well-established, intimate, exclusive company of actors. The same company was home, as well, to Igor; an amicable, handsome, easygoing guy who had a promising career ahead of him. In short, this world was so harmonious that at a certain moment it began to feel absolutely artificial to me.

Then I understood that I was merely deceiving myself. All I really wanted to do was expose the futility of affluence—so that I would see one advantage in my own deprived and uncomfortable existence. The advantage of authenticity.

A not uncommon compensatory trick.

Actually, all lives are equally real or unreal. The quality of everyday private and public loathsomeness in one of them affords no metaphysical bonuses to others.

It’s just that for some people, everything in life works out. For others, it doesn’t. And you can’t draw any moral lesson from it. Other than: Grief to the vanquished.

I looked at my watch again and frowned. I couldn’t do anything about my habit of turning up early for every appointment, whether important or completely inconsequential; even appointments with people who never show up on time anywhere in their lives.

And really, what’s the hurry?



“But you can always try—”

“Look, Felix, Yanka was a very gregarious young woman. She could have met up with anyone … Plus, it’s been over a year already.”

“Maybe you’ll think of someone else.”

“Oh, I don’t know … Well, there was Pasha from Moscow—she met him shortly before that, I think …”

“Who’s this Pasha guy?”

“Uh, what’s his name—Korenev or something. Just an acquaintance. A long time ago, maybe five years ago, he went to Petersburg, and then, I guess, Yanka saw him in Moscow.”

“So he went back to Petersburg?”

“Looks like it.”

“What did Yanka say about meeting him?”

“Oh god, I don’t remember …”

“Do you have any idea where he lives? A phone number?”



I walked around the square, stomped around on one spot, and sat on the damp stone. I started to smoke, paying close attention to my movements. I remember very clearly how one time, when she was watching me smoke, Tatiana mentioned that I had the gestures of an ex-convict. She didn’t know anything at that time, though. She didn’t know anything yet.

Feeling a moist caress on my face, I raised my head, but it was just the spray from the fountain.

Tin cans rolled around under my feet; empty beer bottles stuck up everywhere.

Suddenly, a dozen or so guys in orange pants sprang up out of nowhere and fell upon them. They quickly tossed the clanking bottles and cans into black plastic bags and hurled them into the maw of a toy tractor.

The struggle for cleanliness continued, apparently in an effort to live up to the name of the place—Europe Square.

Gleb, I remembered, was moved to laughter at the inscription on a plaque by the fountain: As a sign of the strengthening friendship and unity of the countries of Europe, the administration of Moscow endeavored on such-and-such a date to create the ensemble of Europe Square.

There was not much to be said about the friendship between the countries of Europe and Moscow—but most touching of all was the clear sense of identification of the bald mayor of Moscow and Co. with the European Union (immortalizing this was just as logical in Phnom Penh as it was in Moscow, in Gleb’s opinion). We discussed the sacred conviction of our fellow citizens that they live in a brilliant European capital—as evidence for which they usually cite the number of high-end boutiques. Gleb, a dyed-in-the-wool “westernizer,” said that the sincere incomprehension of the difference is the clearest evidence of the difference itself.

Having traveled from one end of the continent to the other and lived in London, with a multientry Shengen visa, Gleb considered himself to be in a position to judge and compare. As an indigenous Moscow resident, he just didn’t like it enough; and he categorically refused to recognize it as a part of Europe. His basic argument was the flagrant disproportion of the size of Moscow to the human being, a point that was difficult to counter.

It was rare that anyone wanted to argue with him. I have hardly ever met a person with such sound and penetrating points of view. Also, his talent for expressing them with charm and panache, both verbally and in writing, made Gleb the soul of any gathering, and the star of liberal journalism.

Liberal, in his case, didn’t refer to a position regarding civil society, but was a synonym for measured restraint. As a matter of fact, for Gleb, this restraint stood surrogate for political views to a certain degree—he wrote equally well, and with equal conviction, in both servile and seditious (and, naturally, glossy) publications. The logic of his ideas was so unassailable that even in the preelection hysteria, the most patriotic bosses didn’t find fault with the author on the subject of his loyalty. Indeed, Gleb possessed the talent (without a tinge of sycophantism) of making every boss like him. I still remember back in school, where he and I became friends, how I looked on in amusement as the slightly wilted schoolmarms of a certain age fell involuntarily in love with the straight-A student.

Gleb began publishing at the age of fourteen; at fifteen he had already made it into print in the prestigious union-wide Soviet journals. At twenty he became the head of a weekly magazine, where I too—after trying to make a living as a homegrown punk rocker and from various meager supplemental earnings—got my first steady and meaningful employment (though I was never officially on the payroll).

Many people back then (and not just friends) said that I was a fine writer. In addition to everything else, I worked a lot, carried out all the assignments from the higher-ups, and got everything in on time. Nevertheless, both my articles and myself (no matter the subject, genre, or depth of pathos) were greeted (and published—if they agreed to publish them) by all managers with some vague initial skepticism, as though they were suppressing (and, later, no longer trying to suppress) the instinct to shrug their shoulders. When I asked point blank one day why they hadn’t printed any of my reviews for more than a week, and some fat-assed jerk of a deputy editor muttered in slight exasperation, “You always pan everything, but, you know, people watch those movies and read those books; you just turn up your nose at them!”—I finally decided that it was time to call it quits.

And I did. For two years. Though I firmly believe this had nothing to do with journalism itself.

Of course, in a frenzy of self-searching, I acknowledged (according to an elementary logic) my own mediocrity. But to be honest, I never believed it. And I don’t think it was only due to self-love. I knew I was good at what I did. The fact that no one needed it was another matter altogether. It was precisely my product that they had no need for. Someone else’s—Gleb’s, for instance—of the same subject and quality would be snatched up immediately.

I never understood why. I ultimately came to the conclusion that there was no reason. There are no rules, and no laws. It’s just that some people make it in their jobs, while others don’t. And this work has no objective value. More than that—nothing has objective value.

He should’ve been here already, I thought, looking around and trying to match a person with the voice from the phone yesterday—but none of the men there were paying any attention to me, and one of the two girls sitting right across from me frowned slightly and looked away.



“Dmitry?”

“Felix?”

“Yeah, Dmitry, hi. I called you earlier and you told me you saw Pasha last week.”

“Right.”

“Well, I came down from Petersburg just to meet him and I can’t find him. People say he just dropped out of sight; no one seems to know where he is.”

“Uh-huh, that’s what I heard too; that he, like, disappeared, about a year or so ago. So I called around without much hope of finding him; but what do you know, I got through right away. He’s in Moscow. We got together at that … what’s it called, by Kiev station? You know, Europe Square. We used to hang out there a lot. We used to cross the river and drink beer on that slope, on the grass, with the view …”

“But you don’t see him much these days. Is that right?”

“No, we don’t hang out at all anymore. Almost two years now. When Pasha got out we cooked something up together, but we got busted pretty fast. Somehow, we never saw each other after that.”

“What do you mean, ‘got out’? Did he do time or something?”

“Well, yeah. For something incredibly stupid … A few joints, can you believe it? What bullshit—getting sent up for something like that is truly an art. There was a raid. And he hardly ever smoked. I shit you not, man, they dragged him in purely to meet their quota. For a few measly sticks of weed … but that’s how it works here, right? They can throw you in jail for anything they want. Article 228, section 1: acquisition and storage. The most they can give you is three years, I think—and that’s what they slapped on him. I don’t know why—the judge probably didn’t like his face or something. He did two of the three. Actually, it’s really not that long; but the pen did a number on him. He kind of jitters and jerks a bit when he moves now. See, Pasha always gets, you know, screwed over, somehow. Things never go his way. If you get mixed up with him, you’re gonna get caught red-handed, no matter what. Not because he’s low-down, or a cheat—on the contrary, he’s always honest; in fact, he’s way too honest. He’s a real German, you know—a pedant. Just has bad luck, that’s all. I got burned once because of him, and I started to avoid him after that.”

“What else happened to him?”

“What didn’t happen to him? I’m telling you. He never had a real, bona fide job; never had any money. He wrote for the papers—but he was never on any payroll. All his attempts at business failed. He wrote some kind of novel—same thing. Every publisher he contacted about it—eleven in all, I think—turned it down. Then, six years later or so, one publisher took it on. A minuscule print run; they paid him less than a thousand bucks. No one took any notice of it, naturally. Though Pasha himself said that’s par for the course here in Russia.”

“Why did you decide to get together again, if you don’t mind my asking?”

“He left behind some documents for that company we registered two years ago. And I wanted to see him again—see how the years have treated him. I just wanted to find out, you know, if his karma had taken a turn for the better.”

“So?”

“Well, same as ever. He’s gotten really weird … he’s drinking, I guess. Or shooting up. Not too good, anyway, from what I could see. But I tell you, I did enjoy seeing him. In the sense that, you know, nothing has changed. Because sometimes you think, you know, everything’s okay for me, things are working out, money’s piling up. You’ve got everything you need. And then suddenly something unexpected happens—just out of the blue. And, boom, you’re totally broke, your pockets are empty. Or the meter’s ticking. And so I took a look at Korenev, and, you know, I was convinced: if someone has bad luck, it’ll always be that way. And if your life has always worked out well, most likely it will continue that way …”

“Do you know a Gleb Mezentsev?”

“A little. Through Pasha.”

“Do you know what happened to him?”

“No …”

“He was in a car crash. Two months ago.”

“Whoa … what happened to him?”

“He’s in the hospital.”

“Hurt bad?”

“Pretty serious.”

“Hmmm … I guess that’s how it goes.”

“Pasha and Gleb were friends, weren’t they? I’d like to see Pasha, to talk to him. Could you give me his phone number—the one you reached him at? I’m looking for him, but everyone says he disappeared …”

“His number? Sure.”



I tossed my cigarette butt away, folded my arms behind my head, and stretched. A girl sitting directly across from me glanced over and then mechanically turned away. I just as mechanically slid my gaze above her head, a bit to the right: slid it along the concave façade of the Radisson, along the pseudoclassical colonnade of the station, along the bent stainless steel pipes in the center of the fountain, which were supposed to represent the horns of the bull who abducted Europa, according to the Belgian sculptor. A gift, you understand, to the city.

They’d probably be ashamed to erect something like that in the middle of Brussels.

A shaggy black dog gulped voraciously from the fountain. Little children waded in up to their knees. The girls sitting across from me finally stood up and walked by me, passing to my left toward the bridge, their heels clicking along. I thought to myself that if I had been here with Dmitry, like in the old days, an exciting little encounter with them would have taken place—at least a 70 to 80 percent chance of it.

I can’t say that I really envied his garrulous nature. His ability to get along with anyone, anywhere, at any time, and talk about whatever came up could be tiresome. But his very communicativeness bewitched me sometimes—in its universality and inexplicability. I couldn’t figure out what attraction Dmitry held for people of all ages, social backgrounds, and IQs. He didn’t have, say, Gleb’s brains. He wasn’t especially charming or handsome. He didn’t have the rudeness that is so attractive to girls. On the contrary, Dmitry’s manner and appearance were characterized by a faint, slightly intentional goofiness. A person without much education and wit, he played the role of an enfant terrible. And in this niche he enjoyed condescending but indubitable success, even when he behaved like a complete idiot. Everyone teased him, but at the same time they sought him out and called him incessantly (often without any reason whatsoever), and gathered around him in remarkably large, motley crowds. He affected people like a beautiful woman or free drinks: in his presence people began to chatter loudly, guffaw, and swagger. Guys gave themselves over as drinking buddies, girls as lovers. From the day he was born, Dmitry hadn’t had to lift a finger to find either business partners or bedfellows—in spite of the fact that the guy never stayed loyal to either.

I was no different from his other friends. I was glad to drink with him, prepared to lower my standards of intellect and wit, and was forgiving about minor and not so minor character flaws; I generally took on a protective role, even when our social and financial status suggested the exact opposite …

I thought about our spontaneous encounter last week. There was something very strange, and at the same time very predictable, in the repetition of the classic scenarios of the old days—two people with a bottle on the grassy slope across from Europe Square. Right above the station we saw a golden slash through the gray clouds. Dullish rays fell in fan-shaped sheaves on the shimmery heights of the construction site, its signal lights winking on the straining arms of the giant insectlike cranes. (When we used to sit here back then, there weren’t any cranes.) Below, from the Rostov embankment, a steady hum rose up, interspersed with bellowing horns and the gunning of engines. A Miller beer ad the size of a small building hung above the square, where everything ended for me …

We sat and drank, like before—both of us understanding perfectly well that it would never again be like it used to be. And then it dawned on me that Dmitry had started this phony demonstration of solidarity to prove to himself the absolute and fundamental inequality between us; two people who don’t differ in any fundamental way, neither superior to the other, yet one of them receives everything and everyone without asking, and the other is shunned and doesn’t even get what he has honestly earned. And neither one is to blame for this. And this is nobody’s fault. No one is to blame for anything—actually, there is never rhyme or reason to anything whatsoever.

It’s all just the way it is. For no reason. Just because. Just—because.

I looked up and met someone’s searing gaze. A fairly unpleasant one. It belonged to a burly man who had suddenly materialized in front of me; someone of about fifty with the broad, crudely chiseled mug of a charismatic antihero. The fellow was walking toward me—uncertainly at first, but with every step more and more purposeful. I realized right away who it was. I was about to get up when the guy stopped abruptly, shoved his hand inside his coat, and, staring at me from under his brow, clapped a cell phone to his ear.

* * *

Kostya from the Criminal Investigation Department called; he was a great resource for Felix here in Moscow.

“Hello?” Felix answered in a quiet, curt voice, not taking his eyes off Pasha Korenev.

“You’re trying to find out about Dmitry Lisin?” Kostya asked cautiously, his voice full of concern.

“Yeah.”

“Were you able to see him?”

“Yes. Yesterday.”

“Well, that’s lucky,” Kostya snickered. “Just in time.”

“What do you mean?”

“Well, I happened across his name this morning. I thought of you right away. The report on the explosion on Sirenevy Boulevard came in from the eastern precinct.”

“What explosion?”

“You haven’t heard? At 2 Sirenevy Boulevard. It looks like a gas main burst. Several apartments were destroyed, three people died. One of them was Lisin. He lived in the apartment right above the one that blew up.”

“A gas main?” Felix repeated slowly, looking at Korenev, who sat serenely in the same spot.

“That’s what they suspect. The cause hasn’t been determined yet.”

“It wasn’t gas, Kostya. I mean, maybe it was gas—but it wasn’t an accident. It was murder.”

“How do you know?”

“I just do,” Felix barked, then hung up.

He approached the bastard, who stared calmly back at him and seemed like he was about to hold out his hand in greeting; but Felix’s facial expression stopped him.

“Pasha …?” Felix asked, surprised at the hesitancy of his own voice.

The bastard nodded. “Felix …?”

A plain, pale fellow, who seemed paradoxically both younger and older than his thirty-some years. Absolutely average, a somehow ineffably unprepossessing appearance. At the same time, a certain detail that Felix didn’t catch—probably something in the guy’s eyes—triggered his memory of the words of the late Lisin: He’s gotten really weird. He’s drinking, I guess. Or shooting up …

They stood there facing each other—Korenev, calmly expectant. Felix suddenly realized he didn’t know how to begin, or what to do. Or why he needed to see the guy so urgently … Since Felix had homed in on the creep, reason only intermittently guided his actions. The situation was dictated exclusively by emotions: Felix was impatient to see the monster, to stand near him, to observe him at close range—and to let him know that he knew everything. That this bastard had no way out—he would cringe in fear, he would feel terror so fierce it would hurt …

“My name’s Shakhlinsky,” Felix finally said, in the same strangled voice.

“Uh-huh,” Korenev replied, nodding slightly to himself. Something flickered behind his eyes—but no, it wasn’t fear.

“I’m Yanka’s uncle,” Felix added.

“Please accept my condolences,” Korenev said after a slight pause, and Felix was ready to rip him apart right there. He knew why the son of a bitch had suggested meeting here, in a place full of people. He was afraid …

“I’m a colonel in the police force, Criminal Investigation Department.”

“And what do you want from me?”

“You know what I want,” Felix said, and mastered himself with a deep intake of breath. “They say it was several hours before she died. And you, son of a bitch, will suffer ten times longer, and worse. Do you think I’m going to send you up for this? No, you don’t, of course.” He struggled to assume a gentler expression. “You know there’s not enough evidence. Only I don’t need any friggin’ evidence; I’m going to kill you myself …”

The bastard smirked. Felix could hardly believe his eyes—the guy was smirking without the slightest sign of fear.

“So you think I killed her?”

“And you didn’t think anyone would find out? Right. No clues, and—the main thing—no motive. But I was lucky. Just by chance I learned about a few of your acquaintances. About what happened to them during the past year. The year when you suddenly disappeared. When no one could find you, except a few who died soon after. Or ended up as vegetables on life-support systems—like Gleb Mezentsev.”

“Wait a minute—Gleb was in a car crash.”

“Right. His BMW flew into a ditch after someone drove him off the road … It was a hit and run.”

“You think I did that? That’s crazy—I’ve never even had a driver’s license. Although the fact that you single me out at all is kind of cool. You say you were lucky …?” Korenev stared at Felix, who had a hard time not averting his gaze. But he held out, of course—the bastard lowered his eyes, and nodded. “So you decided I killed them … There’s just one thing I don’t get—why me?”

“Because you, motherfucker, envied all of them. Because you’ve been a sniveler your whole life. Because your life has been a pile of shit. Because you never got a fucking thing you wanted. Because you, you little shit, hate everyone who has it better than you, who lucks out—”

“Lucks out,” Korenev interrupted. “What does that mean, ‘to luck out’? You think you have the right to judge who’s lucky and who isn’t? Do you think there’s any logic to anything? But of course. We always look for some rationale, some system to explain things. But we really invent them ourselves. Simply because we think in these categories; we don’t know any other way. Only there is no system, and no explanation.” Still staring, Pasha Korenev shook his head slowly back and forth. “They only exist in our own minds. That’s what none of you want to understand. What I myself didn’t understand for a long time. I kept thinking there had to be rules of some kind. And I tried to play by them! To do things conscientiously. To keep my word. Not let anyone down. I kept thinking if I was good to people, they’d be good to me.” The corners of his mouth contorted. “But it’s all a load of crap. There are no rules. Nothing depends on your personal qualities or the efforts you make. Either you’re lucky or you aren’t. Only that”—he suddenly took a half-step toward Felix, almost pressing up against him—“doesn’t mean a damn thing. That’s what I’m trying to tell you. That’s why I come to all of you—so you’ll finally start thinking about it. Rules don’t exist here either. And even if you luck out all the time, it doesn’t guarantee anything. Nothing. At. All.”

“Mm-hmm.” Now Felix moved forward slightly, forcing Korenev to fall back a step. “And you took the role of fate upon yourself?”

Korenev snorted in exasperation. “You’re not listening. You try to attach meaning to everything. To find someone to blame. Naturally, it’s easier that way, when there’s someone to blame.” He took another step backward, as if to observe Felix from head to toe. “But you must understand—there is no one to blame. And nothing you can do.” Another step backward. And then, from the side, a group of loud, gesticulating young people surged around him. There was some minor scuffling, after which Korenev ended up about five meters away from Felix. Somehow following fluidly in the wake of the young people, he moved away, skirting the fountain. He quickened his pace, weaving in and out of people in the crowd.

When the bastard was about fifteen feet away, Felix started following. He had no plan—but he wasn’t going to let the son of a bitch get away. Felix had to somehow lead him to a more secluded place, to set him straight or just tie him up and gag him …

In pursuit of Korenev, who maintained a fairly brisk pace and never turned around, Felix crossed the square and made it to the corner of the station—and there he realized the bastard was heading for the subway. He sped up, gaining on Korenev; but only when he was in the crowded vestibule of the station, only when he saw the bastard getting in line to pass through the turnstile leading to the escalators, did he look back at the ticket booth—a hopeless throng of people—and think: I’ll jump the turnstile. Right then, however, he met the gaze of a cop on patrol. Damn …

Korenev pushed his way toward the escalator without having bought a ticket … He completely blended in with the crowd at the turnstile. Felix watched him descend underground—his feet, his waist, finally his neck and head vanished from view …

Rudely pressing against some heavyset lady (who cackled at him indignantly), Felix slipped through the turnstile. Pushing his way in front of everyone else, he hurried to the escalator, expecting to see Korenev rushing down the stairs.

The descent at Kievskaya is a long one; but the bastard was nowhere to be seen. What the …? Felix scoured the length of the escalator with his eyes, oblivious to the complaints of the people whose way he blocked.

Gone … gone …Just like that … slippery bastard …

Shuffling around aimlessly for another minute or two, Felix sighed deeply several times then made his way back outside.

No big deal, really. He knew who to look for, and, thank god, he knew how to search. He’d been doing it his whole life. He never even considered the possibility that he wouldn’t find the bastard again. And besides, Felix was always lucky …

Moving toward the parking lot where he had left the car, he came to the street. He waited for a lull in the stream of traffic and stepped out onto the pavement. In his pocket he felt a buzzing—then he heard the beep of his mobile. Felix hesitated, his hand scrambling around for his phone … Kostya from the Criminal Investigation Department. Felix finally managed to press the answer key, then turned his head at the furious sound of screeching brakes—but for some reason he didn’t feel the impact of the blow at all.



“Hello, Felix? Hello! Hello!?” But after a short, sharp sound, he heard a steady beeping—the connection had broken off. Never mind; he’ll call back.

Kostya stared at the monitor again. Huh, no way, colonel. That Pasha Korenev, the one the Petersburg cop was looking for, had died; according to a document Kostya had just located, it happened twelve months earlier. In the Sklifosovsky Hospital, in the intensive care unit. Fractured skull, swelling of the brain. They found him by the fountain on Europe Square. He had been beaten, and his wallet and cell phone were gone. That place was bad news, Kostya thought, always full of bums.

What a stupid death …





MOSCOW REINCARNATIONS





BY SERGEI KUZNETSOV

Lubyanka





Translated by Marian Schwartz

Nikita dozes off holding my hand.

Such a handsome hand he has. Strong fingers, smooth oval nails, nicely defined tendons. Light hairs, almost imperceptible, but stiff to the touch.

He’s sleeping holding my hand, but I just can’t.

I’m afraid of dozing off. It’s like walking into cold water, slowly immersing yourself, diving headfirst and not knowing what you’ll see on the bottom.

That Crimean summer I dove alone while Nikita watched from shore. Only later did he admit he was afraid to swim.

I wasn’t afraid of anything. I was twenty-eight. Never before had I been as beautiful as I was that summer.

Nor will I ever be again.

Time has wrung me out like laundered linen and thrown me into the dryer like a crumpled rag. Back then I thought, Time spares no one, but now I know that’s not so.

Time changes everyone, but men are grazed by a touch of gray, a leisurely gait, a solidity of figure. At least Nikita has been. As for anyone else, to be honest, it’s been a long time since I’ve cared.

His hands have barely changed. Except that seven years ago a wedding ring appeared.

My skin is tarnishing, withering, covered with a fine fishnet inside of which the years I’ve lived thrash around like caught fish. My hair is falling out and in the mornings I look at my pillow, fighting the temptation to count them.

Once I couldn’t stop myself. Now I know: 252 hairs, almost a handful.

I’m afraid of going bald. I’m afraid of my breasts disappearing in a few years, my belly sticking to my spine, my eyes sinking. Sometimes I feel like a living corpse.

Nine years ago I wasn’t afraid of anything. Now I can’t fall asleep out of fear.

But Nikita isn’t afraid of anything. In those years he’s lost all fear. Blind swap? as we used to say in kindergarten.

I didn’t want to go to kindergarten. I was still afraid then. I thought one day my mama wouldn’t come for me and would leave me there forever. Only later did I learn where that fear came from; it was the echo of my orphanage infancy, the first months of my life.

My mama told me the story herself. You see, sometimes children are mistakenly born to people who aren’t their parents. So they can take them to a special place where their real parents find them. The way we found you.

I was six years old and I didn’t know where children came from. I probably thought about a stork that might mix up his bundles, or a store where after a long line you could buy a child—and they might sell you the wrong one by mistake.

When I was ten, my papa explained: The ancient Hindus believed in the rebirth of souls. I believe you are the little girl your mama couldn’t give birth to.

I knew by then that children came out of the belly, but I didn’t really understand how you could not be able to give birth.

I no longer believed in the stork, or the store, but I believed in the rebirth of souls immediately. And I still do. I believe the soul travels back and forth through history, and can even be born several times in the same century, miraculously not meeting herself in a previous (subsequent?) guise.

I believe that. Or, rather, I know it. And that’s why I lie here sleepless, squeezing Nikita’s hand. I’m afraid to fall asleep.

In the filmy, viscous dimension between waking and sleep my past lives return. Men, women, children. They fill me until it seems like there’s no room left inside for me.

I squeeze into a ball and try to push the past out—it was mine, it wasn’t mine, it may not have existed at all.

No surprise I’m losing weight. I must think that if I shrivel up completely the ghosts will decamp and find themselves another receptacle.

Though I could get used to them. Ultimately, these are my past lives. I recognize them: the old lady twirling in front of a mirror; the man gazing at the river; the young woman hugging her pregnant belly; the man crushing out a cigarette butt; the soldier pulling a grenade pin; the naked man cooking breakfast; the little girl staring at the Black Sea; the man dropping to his knees in front of his lover.

They shout, laugh, cry, moan, and sigh … Sometimes I feel like throwing myself open, embracing them, and saying, Come in, it’s me, your unsafe haven, your future, reincarnation, rebirth. Don’t cry, everything worked out fine, look at me, I’m much happier than you. My life is wonderful: a loving husband, a home, a car, a household, a full cup. They didn’t beat me during their interrogations, my friends weren’t killed, radiation didn’t eat up my flesh, and I didn’t wait to be arrested. I don’t worry about money or survival, I don’t worry about where I’m going to sleep tomorrow or what I’m going to eat. I can’t remember the last time I was hungry.

But the incorporeal ghosts sway in the stratum of sleep and swirl in the murky corners of my huge apartment.

They’ve already lived their own lives; they’re not rushing, being sold off, drinking up the bitter water of earthly existence, or eating the bitter bread of posthumous exile anymore.

They’re always hungry.

They’re eating me from the inside out. My life is food for those I once was. They’re gnawing at my flesh—and every month blood flows out, attesting that the feast continues, the ghosts are not sated, they are still unhappy.

Every month, following the phases of the moon, plus or minus a day, I receive the same letter: You aren’t going to have a child.



Dozing off, we hold hands. My Kolya, Kolya-Nikolai. I want to sleep facing you, but every month that gets harder. You might even say we’re sleeping for three, right? Only two months to go—and our bunny will be born. I wonder whether it’ll be a boy or a girl. The old women in the countryside always guessed—based on your walk, the shape of your belly, and other signs.

Just think, it’s been five years and I still can’t get used to the idea that my Berezovka’s gone. True, old Georgich’s great nephew wrote last month saying they were planning to build a state farm in its place. I don’t even know … I guess that’s good. The cows will moo again and the chickens will run around, as if there’d been no war. You just look at it and it’s all so horrible what happened; how are people supposed to live there?

I told Kolya about it, and he said, So the fact that we’re living in a dead soldier’s apartment doesn’t bother you? That’s the way it should be. New people come to take the place of dead fighters.

Except that we didn’t have any fighters in Berezovka. Foolish Lushka hid two partisans—and that was it.

Nina looks at the street, lined with two-story wooden houses; an invalid on a bench is talking to two old women. The sound from a gramophone reaches her from a neighbor’s window.

This is Moscow, the capital of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the first worker and peasant state in the world. Marina Roshcha.

Nina gazes at her round belly and tries to persuade the boy or girl to hold on a little longer and not kick but lie quietly. The doctor said she could talk to him already. Or her?

Nina’s waiting for her husband. She sits home for days on end, afraid to go out. Even in the daytime they could attack her on the street, take her money away, or just strip her. They could jam a knife into her, or a bullet. There are an awful lot of thieves.

Kolya says it all started after the war. Before, Moscow was different. But now that people have been taught to kill, they just can’t stop.

Nina doesn’t know how to kill. She only knows how to hide so she won’t die.

For two months she hid in the forests, surviving on berries and occasionally digging up potatoes in Berezovka’s charred gardens. At the sound of an engine she would fall to the ground, perfectly still.

Nina loved walking in the forest before. Her mama would laugh and call her my little forest girl.

Her mother burned up along with the rest of the village.

Nina survived because that morning she’d gone out for mushrooms when the punitive expedition showed up. She hid out in the woods and didn’t emerge until it was all over.

Until everyone was dead.

Kolya says he wouldn’t have lasted a day in the forest. I’m afraid of wolves, he says. She laughs; he’s probably not afraid of anything.

Nina is afraid for him.

Afraid they’ll slit Kolya’s throat to take away his gun.

Afraid Kolya will stop someone to check his documents—and the person will start shooting.

Afraid Kolya will go after a thieves’ den—and be killed in a shootout.

Afraid Kolya will walk into a building—and into an ambush.

Nina says, Take care of yourself, for god’s sake. If only you could wait until the child is born!

But Kolya replies, I took an oath. If I don’t stop them they’re going to keep on killing. Pretty recently they butchered a whole family in Marina Roshcha. Even a tiny baby. Got away with 25,000 rubles.

A huge amount. Kolya’s salary is just 550. How long do you have to work to make that kind of money?

How old was the baby? Nina asks.

Still in its cradle, absolutely tiny, Kolya answers. They killed him so he wouldn’t cry.

Why is he telling her this? Nina wants to hear one more time how after she gives birth Kolya is going to take time off. No, Kolya doesn’t want to talk about leaving work, he answers Nina. Wait for us to catch them all, and then we’ll start living well and happily!

Nina doesn’t believe it. She remembers how people used to say, We’ll drive Fritz out and then we’ll start living well and happily. Where is that happiness now? Now it’s like seeing her husband off to the front line every single day.

Actually, it’s her own fault. She knew who she was marrying. From the very first second. Only Kolya was so handsome in his new uniform, blue with red trim. His cap with its sky-blue band. His boots. The moment she saw him at the dance, she fell in love. Kolya later admitted he’d gone into the police force because of the uniform; they issued it for free and he liked wearing it.

There was a star on the cap, and in the center a soldier with a rifle at the ready. Nina liked that a lot too.

At the time Nina had only just arrived and she was afraid of Moscow. It was awful! Everyone cutting in and out, sideways, down the streets—and the locals pushing their way past, swaggering, spitting at their feet, not afraid of anything. You could spot them right away: soft eight-panel caps, boxcalf boots, and white mufflers.

Later Kolya told her those were the thieves. Crooks.

Why can they walk down the street like that with no one arresting them? Nina asked.

Well, you can’t arrest someone for an eight-panel cap, Kolya laughed. Don’t worry, they won’t be walking around for long. Too bad they’ve abolished the vyshka . But that’s all right, if need be we’ll take matters into our own hands—and he winked.

Vyshka was short for capital punishment. Execution. It was abolished a year ago. Kolya says there’s no one to chop timber in Siberia.

Nina thinks, We’re going to have a child—and how are we going to live? It’s good the war’s over. But still, are we really going to spend our whole life in the city? No forest, no real river. You can go to the big park, people dive and swim from the pier—but Nina feels shy. She swims like a country girl, after all, and in Moscow everyone must have some special style.

Nina sits home waiting for her husband. Sits and waits, worried, troubled, and afraid. She can’t make heads or tails of what she reads, and they don’t have a gramophone, or even a radio speaker; it’s an old building. I don’t know whether there were any televisions back then, but Nina and Kolya definitely didn’t have one.

I’m sitting home too, and I’m waiting for Nikita too. I’m worried for him—even though I have no cause for worry. Nikita’s business is peaceful and he drives carefully. I’m still worried, though.

I’d like to say, I don’t know if I could deal with being in Nina’s place, but I can’t. She and I are one and the same, which means at some point I was sitting there like that, waiting for my husband to come home from work, bored, looking out the window, stroking my pregnant belly, afraid to go outside.

It’s weird to feel other people’s lives inside you. Snatches of other people’s thoughts and irrelevant facts suddenly surface in my memory. Edible berries. The best place to gather mushrooms. How to climb a tree and get settled so you don’t fall out at night.

And sometimes a tune gets stuck in my head and keeps ringing in my mind hour after hour. Sometimes I can even make out the words.



My dad the bigwig fucks his tart

Oh bastard me, I fuck my aunt

All the time, everywhere,

From midnight until morn

From one night to the next

And back again till morn.

My dad the bigwig only fucks ’em rich

Oh bastard me, I fuck ’em bent and humped

All the time, everywhere

From midnight until morn

From one night to the next

And back again till morn.



I know this is what the little boys sang when Nina walked around the yard. Nina heard this song, and now I hear it in my head. All the time, everywhere, from midnight until morn—and I don’t know whether this song amused, frightened, or annoyed Nina. I get my melancholy from her. All the time, everywhere—that is, in this life and the ones before, around the clock, night and day, I sit in an armchair, on a seat, on a stool, and wait for my beloved to come home. And I’m afraid something’s going to happen to him.

When I’m Nina, I caress my big pregnant belly. When I’m Masha, I paint my toenails over and over again, though I have no plans to go out. It calms me.

Kolya comes home and tells me how they picked up the Kazentsov gang a few days before, on a train, and how there was shooting. The gang had hidden out in the children’s car but the conductor noticed them and called it in. It turned out they were hijacking cars. They’d ask a driver to take them out of town, where they’d kill him. Now they were the ones getting killed, at least two of them.

Kolya says there are too many guns in Moscow. Captured and brought back from the war, taken away from policemen, stolen from the Hammer and Sickle plant, where they’re selling old inventory to melt down.

To make sure a policeman can’t have his gun taken away, Kolya explained, the cop attached it to a special red cord. The cord goes up one side of his uniform, around his neck, and down the other side. The grip has a special loop where the cord is attached. Kolya explained and even showed me, but I still don’t understand. Better they just take the gun. That way, if some crook decides he wants your gun, he doesn’t have to kill you for it.

I’m really scared for Kolya. Since I got pregnant, I’m even more scared.

At first I was so glad we were going to have a child! I imagined him growing there, inside me. I went to the doctor once a month and the doctor told me when his little eyes appeared, and his little hands. I’m only sorry he’s going to be born in Moscow and not the country. What kind of a life is this? Why did I ever come here? I must have known I’d meet Kolya. There’s nothing else good here in Moscow.

I’m glad I didn’t enter the institute. I’d have had to study—but before you know it, a little baby is going to be born and Kolya will come to his senses. We’ll go away together, wherever we want.

I’ve been living in Moscow nearly a year and I still can’t figure out what draws people here. In line at the doctor’s I met a woman, also near her due date but older than me, her name was Marfa, also from the country, but she’s been in Moscow a long time, from back before the war. She’s a good woman and she reassures me, says giving birth isn’t so terrible. What’s terrible, she says, is living, and even more terrible—dying. Then I said, Well, I know, my whole village perished. And she stroked my head and said, Poor thing!—and for a second it felt like my mama was with me again. Though it’s a sin to say so, of course, because I’ll never have another mama. I’m a mama myself now. Only two months to go.

In line at the doctor’s the women were talking about something terrible. They said you could get rid of a child for money. If you didn’t want to give birth. In Berezovka they said that girls drank all kinds of potions to make it happen. I was little but I understood what they were saying. Well, a potion is understandable. But here apparently you could find a secret doctor and for fifteen hundred rubles he would take care of … well … it … everything.

Fifteen hundred! That’s so much money! It’s terrible to think who might have that! Here I am working out how to survive on 550 every month. For two—it’s hard. And now a child as well, and he has to be fed.

I wish he could be born as soon as possible, my little bunny. If it’s a boy, I hope he looks like Kolya. And if a girl, like my mama. I want her to have the same kind of eyebrows, and ears too.

I hope she’s like my mama. I don’t have anything left of her, not even a photograph. Everything burned up.

Mama would have been happy for me now. She must have been just as happy when she was dying. She knew I’d been saved.

Kolya laughs at me, but I know: there is a God somewhere. And my mama is with Him right now, on a cloud, watching me and seeing that I’m going to have my own little bunny, my own little boy, my own little girl—instead of her, instead of Papa, instead of Aunt Katya and Uncle Slava, instead of lame Mitrich and old lady Anfisa. Instead of our whole village.

Hurry up and get born, little bunny. I mean, get born when it’s time, but don’t make me wait too long. I’m a little afraid of giving birth. In Moscow you have to go to the hospital. There are strangers there and who knows what they might do. And people say there are doctor-wreckers around now too. And crooks probably.




Here she sits, day after day, little Nina from ’48, getting heavier and heavier—and so is my heart. Because all the time, everywhere, from midnight until morn—it’s the same old story, and I know what happens next.

Two weeks before the birth Nina puts jacket potatoes on the burner and suddenly remembers she’s out of salt.

She goes over to Aunt Vera’s, her neighbor.

She knocks and no one answers, so Nina pushes on the door and shouts, Aunt Vera! She walks in and she’s struck by a cast-iron pot. They were aiming for her head but she managed to jump to the side, and then she hears a whisper: Finish the bitch off! She shields her unborn baby with her arms and starts yelling, but not loudly enough. When the second attacker strikes her in the belly, she screams loudly enough for the whole building to hear, the whole courtyard, even the street—and the sound barrels over the neighboring roofs, over the quays of the Moscow River, over the attractions at the central park, over the pavement of Red Square, over the Mausoleum’s pyramid, over the Kremlin’s stars, over the empty pit where the demolished temple once stood, over the wooden buildings built after the war, over the thieves’ dens and lairs, over the police stations, over the prisons and penal colonies, over the subway entrances, over the movie theaters and cultural institutions—over all of postwar Moscow, over the unlucky victor city, over the kids without fathers, the women without husbands, the men without arms, legs, conscience, fear, family, memory, or love.

While Nina is still falling on the bloody ground, screaming and screaming …

One more blow and she would have been silenced forever. The attackers killed Aunt Vera and they could have killed Nina too. Smashed her head in, slit her throat, beat her with whatever came to hand—but they fled.

They would be caught two days later. Maybe they’d shoot someone during the arrest.

But Kolya was running down the street, holding the tiny body close, and the umbilical cord dangled like one more piece of red piping, and his whole handsome uniform was covered in blood. Kolya was running, cursing, weeping, and too late.

It was a boy.




Two years later they left Moscow. The state farm built where Berezovka had burned down gave them a house; a good muzhik always comes in handy in the countryside. And so they lived, until their death. Kolya trained to be a tractor driver; Nina worked as a milkmaid, poultry maid, and clerk at the general store—whatever opportunity arose. For a while she was even a kindergarten teacher. But not for long.

They didn’t have children of their own. Kolya died in 1985, Nina a year later.

Sometimes I see her very old. Her hands are folded in her lap, she’s sitting on a stool by the window, and the older teenagers, the girls and boys, are giggling on the bench. Music reaches her from an open car.

Nina has no one to wait for and nothing to fear. Her life is over.

Only in her head, like a worn-out record. All the time, everywhere, from midnight until morn, from one night to the next, and again till morn is like an obsession, an incantation, a promise that it will all happen again.

* * *

I doze off holding Jan’s hand, but it doesn’t matter. At night I dream of my lovers. The men I couldn’t have. The boy from our school, a year younger than me, his curly fair hair escaping his school cap: a car ran him down right in front of his house, in front of his parents and nanny. The Menshevik agitator, his glasses shattered, his cracking voice turning into a short screech when a bullet forced the petals of a crimson rose open on his jacket chest. The Red soldier in the dusty helmet silently bowing over the corpse of his comrade who was captured by the White Cossacks; a star was carved on his salt-strewn back—a five-pointed star gone from red to brown. A fifteen-year-old kid shouting through tears, Swine, swine!, his ginger hair soaked with sweat and stuck to his forehead, so you wished you could run your hand over it. A stout man, temples lightly touched with gray, looking back for the last time before boarding that barge—a spark in his dark pupil, like a gleam of light, but from the other shore.

I doze off holding Jan’s hand. It’s a strong hand covered with fine faded hair, his closely trimmed nails edged in black.

I kiss his fingers and imagine that this narrow dark stripe is caked blood, the congealed blood of the people he’s ordered to be executed. I kiss his hand and think that this is the hand of someone who separates life from death, who splits human existence in two, the hand of someone used to deciding for others, whether they are to live or die.

My lips flick across his palm, travel up toward the bend in his elbow, and slip over the tendons of his forearms. When he makes a fist they tense, like a belt drive, and I feel the flow of blood, the faint pulsing, and my lips continue their journey, and I kiss his armpits, the hair smelling of grim soldier sweat, the only patch of real hair on his body, if you don’t count the thick growth at the base of his mighty shaft, which rises down there somewhere. I forbid myself to think about that, run my tongue over his smooth chest, just grazing his nipples—and then Jan places his heavy hand on my back, and his nails start quietly clawing at my skin, always in the same spot, between my shoulder blades—and even after who knows how many reincarnations I still swoon when Nikita strokes my back like that—I swoon, and then I shudder, and my tongue turns downward, following the narrow path between his heaving ribs, crossing the puffy scar from the saber blow—He did get me, after all, the snake, after I shot him with my revolver—and run my finger over the scar, imagining some White officer drawing his sword against his killer with the cold fury of desperation, and at the same time I drop lower with my lips, to the rosette of his navel, and Jan puts his hand on the back of my head, urging, directing, hastening the now inevitable movement. My tongue goes into a spiral, feeling his great axis, around which my night revolves, rise higher and higher as it swells with blood. Finally, squeezing his two globes, I open my mouth and swallow the crimson head, sucking in air through fluttering nostrils, as if it were a line of cocaine, moving up and down, feeling the weight of his hand on the back of my head, the resilience of his cock between my lips, the trembling of his testicles in my hand, and the quivering of his powerful male body.

I’ve known the taste of quite a few men’s cocks. My tongue and palate have learned to distinguish adolescent languor, animal fear, ominous hatred, trembling adoration, impatience, burning, itching, haste, the urgency of unspilled semen, the pressure of lust, and the spasm of passion.

Jan’s taste is the taste of gun grease and machine oil. Viscous and sticky, it makes me shudder just to think of it. I hold on to his balls—easy to take, hard to let go—and feel his shaft moving in my mouth—the almost toylike barrel of a revolver, though not small—the taste of which so many have learned in years past. No, the huge hot barrel of an artillery gun, the organ of a machine of destruction, poised to fire, just waiting for the command.

I’m moving faster and faster, the hand on the back of my head won’t let me rest, my lips itch with a sweet pain—I press my whole body to Jan, and from the depth of my heart rises the sacred word. It runs through my veins, flies up my throat, and opens my mouth even wider with the violent magic command: Fire!—and a sticky stream of semen explodes in my head.

At school, in scripture class, they taught us that the seed dies and yields much fruit. Jan’s seed is dead and cools on my lips in a whitish film. The fruit it brings … they’re beautiful those fruit—and tears run down my cheeks. Then he takes his hand from the back of my head, sits down on the bed, and jerks me toward him. I bury my sticky lips in his shoulder, and his hand lazily rakes my spine.

Then Jan starts talking. He recalls the Civil War, the Kronstadt rebellion, the Antonov uprising, the counterrevolutionary plots. He tells me how his day went.

His days pass with mundane matters. Compiling lists, dictating telegrams, and listening to reports, denunciations, interrogations, resolutions, and decisions. Now Jan almost never does the executing himself—Let the others do some work, he says. At the beginning of our affair I asked him whether he remembered how many people he’d killed, and Jan answered, In battle doesn’t count, and when they lowered me into the barge—there was really no one keeping score.

Sometimes I tell myself, Right now I’m crying on the chest of a man who has killed people without count—and my heart pounds like a hammer. I ask, Could you shoot me?

Of course—Jan grabs me by the shoulders—of course I could. I’ve shot men I slept with. They were traitors. I serve the Revolution, but you understand, Kolya, and the Revolution does not forgive treason.

I don’t ask him how many men he’s slept with. I’m afraid he doesn’t remember them any more than he does those he killed. I’m afraid of getting lost on his list, his long list, like his list of executions.

I don’t ask him whether he’s ever slept with a woman. That thought is unbearable: imagining Jan with a woman, imagining his mighty cock plunging into those fusty wet human insides. The female secretion is disgusting, like rust eating into the barrel of a rifle. I can’t imagine Jan’s seed, the seed of death, spilling in a woman’s lap, that nauseating source of new life.

I’d like to hold Jan’s cock in my hand and squeeze it with my lips always—to know that not a single drop of his seed would fertilize a woman. Small children are awful, their howls are a parody of passion, and their stinking diapers, strollers, and bonnets are the gloomy prophecy of old age’s impotence, which I will not live to see.

One morning I’ll see my cock dozing between my hips like a feeble worm. One evening, at the sight of a man’s nakedness, it won’t perk up and will stay wrinkled and pathetic. That’s the day I’ll realize my old age has arrived. And I’ll ask Jan—because Jan will always be by my side, forever young—to add me to his execution list and—in memory of our love—finish me off himself.

Right now Jan almost never takes part in the executions. I’m saving my bullets, he jokes. I have a dream about shooting a countess. A real live countess.

When he told me this the first time I got scared. I imagined some high society love story: little Jan, an errand boy; the countess he lusts after (or who lusts after him); the old count who in the murk of the conjugal bedroom reveals to Jan the mysteries of homosexual love; a woman’s silhouette in the doorway; the shouts, the hysterics, maybe the police or a lashing in the stables; the vow for revenge, underground cells, the party of Bolsheviks, revolution, war, Cheka, execution lists, my tears on his shoulder …

That time Jan reassured me.

You have to understand, he said, I’ve never seen a genuine countess. Only in the movies. So I want to see how countesses behave before death, how they die, what color blood they have.

Aristocrats have blue, I joked, but Jan didn’t answer. I saw his cock stiffen up again, and in an onset of jealousy I squeezed it and Jan’s nails dug into my back. Then he loosened my fingers and laughed. What are you, jealous? Do you want me to take you along when we send her off to Dukhonin?

Since then we’ve spoken of this often. Jan’s dream has become my dream. We’ve imagined finding a countess: a spy infiltrated by White émigrés from Paris; an aristocrat in hiding who survived the Revolution in some out-of-the-way house, masquerading as a peasant, factory worker, or student. On the day of her execution she’ll be wearing a white dress, holding a parasol, wearing black high-laced shoes on low heels. Sometimes we’ll lead her down a brick corridor to the last wall, sometimes we’ll take her out into the snow in the Cheka courtyard (they haven’t executed anyone there in a long time, but in my dreams for some reason I see her walking, stumbling in the snow, across that courtyard), sometimes we’ll take her out of town, to the Gulf of Finland. Even in his dreams Jan won’t let me carry out the sentence myself—I just hand him the revolver and then he, squinting, slowly raises the muzzle and the countess turns pale, opening her parasol with a trembling hand or dropping it in the snow, covering her face in elbow-length white gloves. Jan always says, Farewell, countess!—and the seed of death bursts from his barrel, and her white dress turns red, soaked with blood, ordinary red blood, the same color as everyone else he has shot.

His dreams go no further than that shot, but in my visions I drop to my knees before him, kiss the revolver’s smoking muzzle, and then carefully take the other shaft into my mouth, a shaft poised and ready to fire.

I doze off holding Jan’s hand and think, Today it seems like he isn’t really with me, as if he’s thinking about something else, not the Revolution even, but some other young man, a year or two younger than me maybe, a twenty-two-year-old beauty with curly fair hair. Half-asleep, I see the three of us, then Jan goes away somewhere and my new lover kisses me on the lips—and then Jan’s voice wakes me, and I don’t understand right away what he’s said, but when I do I squeeze his hand even harder—and fall asleep for real.

I’ve found her, Jan says. I’ve found the countess.

There’d been a joint meeting to fight banditry—the police, UgRo, and OGPU. When they were done, Jan went outside and saw a young woman standing with her elbows resting on a fence, almost stock-still, her entire figure replete with bourgeois refinement, the aristocratism of the old regime. She was out of place there, among the strong men in leather jackets. I should ask for her documents, Jan thought, but at that moment an UgRo officer he didn’t know ran up to the girl, hugged her, and kissed her on the lips.

Jan walked away so as not to attract attention, only later he asked, Who was that kissing the woman over there?—and in reply he heard the man’s name.

All the rest was a technical matter. Jan made inquiries and found out more about the man. Some Civil War hero, a fighter against banditry, a distinguished comrade. True, he had to dig deeper when it came to the girl. A student at the university—so Jan stopped by her department and checked her documents. Everything seemed in order, a worker family, but her name put him on his guard. He went to the address where her mother and sister lived. My revolutionary instinct did not mislead me, he chuckled. When the house committee saw his warrant, they told him everything. A former bourgeoise who started at the factory recently so she could get into the university.

The street cleaner volunteered to show him where they’d lived before—in their own house, it turned out. And there, not believing his own ears, Jan heard this: The dead count’s wife and daughter.

I’ll collect some more documents, he said, and I felt his fingers trembling in my hand, and report to Comrade Meerzon that a representative of the exploiting classes concealed her origin when entering the university, and with criminal intent entered into a liaison with an officer of the workers and peasant militia. This means the death penalty, believe me, Vitya, I know how to write.

I pressed my whole body to Jan, soaking up his trembling.

Why didn’t you say something? I whispered. After all, this is a gift for both of us.

Yes, Jan replied gravely, for the Revolution’s birthday.

The anniversary isn’t until the next week, but I realize that Jan is already counting the days until his Farewell, countess!—when the crimson rose blossoms on her white dress.

He said the Revolution’s birthday, as if the Revolution is a person, a woman he’s in love with. I adore that chivalry in him, that obedience and sterility, the cold flame of unearthly passion eating him up from the inside. For Jan we are both the Revolution’s lovers, and our intimacy is just an attempt to get close to Her; for him a new attempt, after years of war and execution lists, to replace death cries with cries of pleasure and the lead seed of the revolver with the seed of our love drying on my lips.




In the morning I watched Jan dress. He turned his back to me and I gazed at his butt, rounded and resilient, gazed at the scar between his broad shoulder blades … Aroused and trembling, I ran over and kissed the back of his neck.

Jan smiled over his shoulder.

Not now, Vitya, I have to go, and so do you.

Yes, I went to work too. A boring office job. If it hadn’t been for meeting Jan, my life would have been as flat as the papers I sorted through. I despised my job, though Jan did say, This too is service to the Revolution.

I got dressed and wanted to leave with him—but Jan wasn’t going to wait for me.

In a hurry to see your countess? I asked.

Our countess—and he smiled in the doorway.

I often think those words were the greatest avowal of love in my life, a magnificent epilogue to our romance, the farewell moment in a string of nights that smelled of semen and gun grease, long nights we shared the way we shared the Revolution, that stern Virgin; the way we shared the countess, the snow-white lamb doomed for slaughter in Her name.




Jan didn’t come back that night. Sometimes he was kept late, but he always warned me in advance. After midnight, tortured by suspicion, jealousy, and fear, I ran all the way across the city to Lubyanka Square. I imagined the attempted arrest, the resistance of the counterrevolutionary conspirators, a foolish bullet, and a bloody rose on his broad, hairless chest.

I asked the guard whether Jan was there and in reply I got, Get out of here, contra!, words that are doubly frightening on OGPU’s threshold. Lost, I wandered off; turning the corner, I heard the sound of an engine. A car was pulling up and behind the wheel sat a young boy. I knew him; he’d brought Jan home a couple of times after nighttime operations.

Are you Viktor? he asked.

I nodded, hesitant to ask about Jan. But he told me without waiting for my question. Later I thought they might have been lovers too. The boy’s voice held a sadness, and he told me the truth, which an OGPU agent isn’t supposed to share with an outsider—unless, of course, something more connects him to that outsider than the nighttime street, the predawn hour, and the dim glow of the streetlamps.

We got a warning, he said, that Jan is supposedly linked to the SRs and is planning a terrorist act. An UgRo agent reported that some petty thief happened to give testimony about this during a roundup.

What nonsense, I murmured. Jan has nothing to do with thieves.

I don’t know, the boy said. They killed the thief when he tried to escape. But the UgRo agent is such a distinguished comrade—he fought in the Civil War and can’t be doubted. He spoke with Comrade Meerzon in his office for two hours, and Meerzon personally signed the arrest order.

In the camps people sometimes talk about how they learned of the arrest of their near and dear. Usually they say, We believed they’d sort things out there and release him. I grinned ever so slightly. That night I had no illusions. I knew how this machine worked. I knew I’d never see Jan again. I knew it was pointless to go see Meerzon and tell him that the UgRo agent’s lover was a former countess and he had slandered Jan when he realized Jan was getting close to her. Yes, I knew it was all pointless. Pointless and dangerous.

If there had been roosters in Moscow, that night they could have cockadoodle-dooed without end. I renounced my love in a flash—I said, Well, Comrade Meerzon knows better—and hunched up, went to meet the graying dawn.

My love died before the bullet entered Jan’s smooth neck, right where I’d kissed him for the last time. My love died. The man I loved couldn’t sit in a cell or answer any interrogator’s questions. He could only ask the questions himself, only lock other people up in cells, with every movement asserting the great invigorating power of revolutionary death, which boiled in him like an eternal spring, gave strength to the roots of that mighty tree, filled with sap the strong shaft that swelled between my lips.




After Jan’s disappearance I was gripped by a dreary sadness, as if the whole postcoital tristia our nights had never known had simply been biding its time. My dreams were pale, colorless, like the pages of the daily newspapers with their reports about new achievements, new construction, and new enemies. I went back to my hopeless, faded existence, now even more insipid than before I met Jan. Even young boys and men didn’t excite me now, as if deep down inside I had found a secret inner courtyard where I made the very possibility of intimacy and love face the wall.

One day, at dawn, I dreamed of a girl in white carrying a parasol and wearing high-laced boots. She was walking arm in arm with a man I didn’t know who was wearing a leather jacket, and I had no doubt that this was my love’s murderer, Jan’s murderer. I was reminded of the unbearable contrast between the white lace and black leather jacket where their arms touched. The man seemed my age, broad of shoulder, round-headed, and like many in those days, shaved bald. The glance he cast at the girl radiated tenderness, but the moment he looked away his eyes turned into two black circles, two endless tunnels, two rifle muzzles ready to fire.

I woke up. On my lips was the forgotten taste of gun grease and machine oil. For the first time since Jan’s disappearance I started to caress myself, turned over on my back, shutting my eyes, and squeezed my hardening cock in my hand. I imagined Jan—his powerful hands and fingers covered in fair hair, the scars on his back and belly, the prominent tendons of his forearms, his hairless chest, the forgotten smell of wartime sweat; but the familiar features faded and through Jan’s image his murderer peered imperiously, as if Jan had turned into that man, as if the murderer had swallowed Jan up. When the metamorphosis was complete, a thick stream spurted up and fell in dead drops on my belly.

The countess was a mirage, a fata morgana. A set trap, a temptation Jan could not resist. The Revolution did not forgive infidelity; the Revolution’s jealousy was worse than my youthful jealousy. The false promise to bring a lamb for sacrifice could not fool Her; in the secret order to which Jan and I belonged there was no place for women—only Her. Passion that did not belong to the Revolution could only be given to another man, as if to one’s own reflection in the mirror, one’s own double, one’s own partner in the strict service of the cruel maiden.

I knew my turn would come sooner or later. I was going to pay for the dreams Jan and I shared; I would pay for our countess.

I waited for many years, and when the time came, I signed the investigation’s protocol without reading it—but I didn’t tell them anything about Jan, or our love, or the bewitching fata morgana who drew us into the fatal abyss.

Sometimes I think I didn’t betray our love after all.

I was waiting for them to execute me, but times had changed. The Revolution required slaves, not sacrifices. They sent me to a camp, where I was certain I would die. I could die in transit, in Siberia, or at the colony; or, after the second arrest, in the transit prisons, in Dzhezkazgan or Vorkuta. I probably didn’t perish because the death-infused seed I’d spilled into my throat so many nights in a row had filled me with strength.

In ’56, during the wave of Khrushchev’s rehabilitations, I returned to Moscow. I thought, They’ve rehabilitated Jan too. I thought I might learn the name of the UgRo informer, meet with him and look into his deep dark eyes … But I didn’t try. What would I have done if I’d met the man? In my dreams I sometimes killed him, sometimes I had sex with him, and often at the decisive moment the countess would walk into the bedroom, a ghost, still very young, walk in and watch silently, and his mighty round-headed cock would soften in my lips.

Once I dreamed that the bullet—my lover’s lead seed—would not let time waste my flesh. I’d been twenty-four—and the same number of years have now passed since I came back from Kazakhstan, although once again I thought I would soon die. The years have faded my memory of Jan, my memory of our love, my memory of the camp, the countess, and her round-headed companion, everything that happened in the last seventy-odd years. I’ve spent nearly my entire life alone; and in old age even the old ghosts refrained from violating my solitude.

I know this is how I’ll die. Alone, in an empty apartment, the summer of 1980, the sixty-third anniversary of the Revolution’s birth.

Death is a great cheat, a fata morgana. I once dreamed of it, but it slipped away, over and over. Eventually I gave up, weary, and backed off.

Now it’s coming for me and I say, Listen, I don’t understand why I ever loved you. In reply you squeeze my old fingers in your cold hand.

Is this really what I dreamed of half a century ago?

Too bad. You’ve taken so long to get here, I almost forgot how much I once loved you!




A little girl on Crimea’s cliffs, a young woman from a burned-out village, an old woman in front of a mirror. A sailor floating down the Volga, a soldier pulling out a pin, an old man waiting for death, a man finding it for himself. And more and more new souls keep crowding in behind them.

All of them are me.

My god, so many! None of them are left—the son, the daughter, the heir, the heiress—no one is left, no one and nothing, there’s not even anyone to remember, anyone to tell, anyone to utter a word to those who came after. No one sees or hears them.

Only me …

Masha weeps, she weeps for everyone who vanished without a trace, weeps and repeats: Only me, only me … and does that mean I’m their heir? Does that mean I have to bear all this, preserve these souls in my emaciated body, bear them eternally in exchange for my unconceived children?

I’m as alone as alone can be, Masha tells herself. I never knew my real parents, my mama and papa drove me out, I have no brothers or sisters, and will never have children. How will I carry this burden alone? Am I a medium or something? Did I summon up the dead? No, they came to me of their own accord, entered me the way a rapist enters a sleeping woman, a woman who has lost the strength to resist.

Oh well, if you’ve come, make yourself comfortable, eat me, enjoy. Here is my flesh, here is my blood, but no bread and wine are served here. Be my guests, only know it’ll be a short story. Because I’m not going to be able to bear all this any longer.

I can’t alone.

And I can’t call for help.

I’ll go to Nikita and say, I hear voices, I have other people, dead people, living inside me. Instantly his voice will become very patient, sympathetic, and upbeat. That voice will make even me start to think I’ve lost my mind and belong in a psych ward. It’s probably better if I don’t say anything at all.

Just so he’s nearby, just so he doesn’t leave, just so he holds my hand—and I’ll keep quiet, I’ll deal with the rest myself.

I’ll say, Wasn’t it nice in the Crimea nine years ago? Remember I was still telling fortunes on the quay? Could that have been when it all started? Could that be where I let all these alien lives inside me, all these lost, dead, unfortunate, barren souls? But we were still having fun that evening, drinking wine, eating shashlik. We were young and foolish. Strong and confident. Maybe deep down I still have that strength, maybe it’s enough at this age, what do you think, Nikita, eh?

Don’t answer, you don’t have to. After all, you and I know ourselves how much we can withstand. Don’t answer, all right? Just don’t go away, please. Don’t go.

I’ll just hold your hand—we’ll all just hold your hand—and maybe we’ll surface, or maybe we’ll finally learn to breathe underwater.SYSTEM OF REGULATORY DOCUMENTS IN CONSTRUCTION
SUMMARY OF REGULATIONS
ON ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION

UNDERGROUND RAILROADS
SP 32-105-2004
STATE COMMITTEE OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
FOR CONSTRUCTION AND THE HOUSING AND UTILITIES COMPLEX
(GOSSTROY OF RUSSIA)
Moscow
2004
INTRODUCTION
1. ELABORATED BY
«Metrogiprotrans» OJSC, «Russian Tunnel Association» All-Russian Public Organization,
Scientific-and-research center of tunnels and Underground Railroads, «Scientific-andresearch institute of transport construction» OJSC, Sent-Petersburg branch of Federal State
Unitary Enterprise «All-Russian Scientific-and-research institute of fire prevention» of
Ministry of Emergency Situations of Russia, Independent Non-commercial Organization
«Investments in Construction of Underground Railroads» (Investstroymetro), «Underground
Railroad Tunnel Geodesy» (Metrotonnelgeodeziya) OJSC, State Unitary Enterprise
«Scientific-and-research and Design Institute of the Moscow General Layout», State Sanitaryand-epidemiological supervision center on the Moscow Underground Railroad, Management
of the constructed Underground Railroad of the State Unitary Enterprise «Moscow
Underground Railroad», State Unitary Enterprise «Scientific-and-research, project designing
and technological institute of concrete and reinforced concrete», OJSC «VIZBAS» (Russian
abbreviation of Dewatering, Injection, Freezing, Drilling, Anchors, Piles), OJSC «Moscow
Underground Railroad Construction», OJSC «Special design-and-technological bureau
«Construction of tunnels and Underground Railroads»», CJSC «Engineering geology of
historical territories», Federal State Unitary Enterprise «All-Russian Scientific-and-research
Institute of Railroad Transport» of the Traffic Ministry of Russia, State Unitary Enterprise
«Moscow Scientific-and-research and design institute of typology and experimental
engineering» and a number of specialists.
COORDINATED WITH: Federal Mining and Industrial Inspectorate of Russia (letter №
08-УГР/355 dated 04.06.2003 year), State Energy Supervision, Licensing and Energy
Effectiveness Department under the Ministry of Energy of Russia, (letter № 32-01-10/67
dated 28.05.2003 year), General Administration of State Fire Protection Services under the
Ministry of Emergency Situations of Russia (letter № 18/4/1561 dated 10.06.2003 year),
Chief State Medical Officer on the railroad transport – deputy chief state medical office of the
Russian Federation (letter № ЦУВСС-8-15 dated 30.05.2003 year);
INSERTED BY: Administration of technical rate setting, standardization, and certification
in the construction and the housing and utilities complex of Gosstroy of Russia;
2. APPROVED for application by the letter of Gosstroy of Russia № ЛБ-1912/9 dated
23.03.2004 year;
3. INSTEAD OF «Handbook on the designing of Underground Railroads», approved by
the «Transport Construction» Corporation 26.06.92 year, № МО-120.

Page 1 of 295

CONTENTS
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 6
1. Application area...................................................................................................................... 7
2. Regulatory references, terms, definitions, and abbreviations ................................................. 7
3. General provisions .................................................................................................................. 7
4. Engineering researches .......................................................................................................... 8
4.1. Engineering-geological researches .................................................................................. 8
4.2. Engineering-geodesical researches ................................................................................. 11
4.3. Engineering-ecological researches .................................................................................. 14
5. Engineering............................................................................................................................ 17
5.1. Traffic and carrying capacity .......................................................................................... 17
5.2. Plan and longitudinal profile ........................................................................................... 17
5.3. Stations ............................................................................................................................ 20
5.4. Main line and connecting tunnels, near-tunnel facilities................................................. 25
5.5. Urban infrastructure objects ............................................................................................ 26
5.6. Construction structures .................................................................................................... 26
5.6.1. Enclosing structures .................................................................................................. 26
5.6.2. Materials ................................................................................................................... 27
5.6.3. Linings, water-proofing and anticorrosion protection .............................................. 28
5.6.4. Loads and effects ...................................................................................................... 31
5.6.5. Calculation of structures of the underground facilities ............................................. 37
5.7. Track and contact rail ...................................................................................................... 40
5.7.1. Track ......................................................................................................................... 40
5.7.2. Contact rail ................................................................................................................ 44
5.8. Ventilation, heat supply, heating, compressed air ........................................................... 46
5.8.1. Ventilation ................................................................................................................ 46
5.8.2. Heat supply ............................................................................................................... 56
5.8.3. Heating ...................................................................................................................... 56
5.8.4. Compressed air ......................................................................................................... 57
5.9. Water supply, drainage, sewerage ................................................................................... 57
5.9.1. Water supply ............................................................................................................. 57
5.9.2. Drainage .................................................................................................................... 59
5.9.3. Sewerage ................................................................................................................... 61
5.9.4. Pipelines .................................................................................................................... 62
5.10. Electric power supply .................................................................................................... 62
5.10.1. Electrical calculations. Grounding .......................................................................... 62
5.10.2. Substations .............................................................................................................. 64
5.10.3. Traction network ..................................................................................................... 65
5.10.4. Electromechanical installations .............................................................................. 68
5.10.5. Lighting ................................................................................................................... 69
5.10.6. Cable network ......................................................................................................... 72
5.11. Electrical installations control ....................................................................................... 74
5.12. Train traffic control ....................................................................................................... 76
5.13. Communication ............................................................................................................. 80
5.14. Location of operation personnel .................................................................................... 84
5.15. Electric depot................................................................................................................. 84
5.15.1. Buildings and structures.......................................................................................... 84
5.15.2. Track and contact rail ............................................................................................. 87
5.15.3. Electric power supply ............................................................................................. 90
5.15.4. Train traffic control ................................................................................................. 92
5.15.5. Communication ....................................................................................................... 92
Page 2 of 295

5.16. Fire safety ...................................................................................................................... 94
5.16.1. Construction structures and materials ..................................................................... 94
5.16.2. Categories of premises and facilities on the explosion and fire hazard .................. 94
5.16.3. Water supply ........................................................................................................... 95
5.16.4. Automated fire detection and extinguishing installations, fire alarm and
evacuation control facilities ................................................................................................ 96
5.16.5. Ventilation and smoke protection ........................................................................ 98
5.16.6. Evacuation of people ........................................................................................... 101
5.16.7. Electric power supply and control ....................................................................... 102
5.17. Sanitary and hygiene .................................................................................................. 102
5.17.1. General provisions ............................................................................................... 102
5.17.2. Underground Railroad lines ................................................................................. 103
5.17.3. Electric depot, administrative and production buildings ..................................... 104
5.17.4. Radiation safety ................................................................................................... 105
5.18. Environmental protection ........................................................................................... 105
5.13.1. Environmental air ................................................................................................ 105
5.18.2. Water objects ....................................................................................................... 106
5.18.3. Green plantings .................................................................................................... 106
5.18.4. Geological environment ....................................................................................... 107
5.18.5. Soils ..................................................................................................................... 107
5.18.6. Solid wastes ......................................................................................................... 108
5.18.7. Historical and cultural monuments ...................................................................... 108
5.19. Protection of municipal facilities from noise, vibration and ground currents ............ 109
5.19.1. Protection from noise and vibration..................................................................... 109
5.19.2. Protection from ground currents .......................................................................... 109
5.20. Protection of structures from aggressive media effects ............................................. 110
5.21. Protection of the Underground Railroad facilities and devices from ground
currents corrosion ................................................................................................................ 114
5.22. Security alarm system ................................................................................................ 116
5.23. Administrative-and-production buildings .................................................................. 117
5.24. Organization of construction ...................................................................................... 117
5.25. Industrial security ....................................................................................................... 121
5.26. Technical and protected zones ................................................................................... 121
6. Construction ....................................................................................................................... 122
6.1. General provisions........................................................................................................ 122
6.2. Organizational-technological preparation .................................................................... 123
6.3. Geodesic-surveying provision ...................................................................................... 124
6.3.1. Planned-high-altitude network on the surface ....................................................... 124
6.3.2. Orientation of the underground planned-high-altitude network ............................ 126
6.3.3. Planned-high-altitude network in the underground openings ................................ 127
6.3.4. Geodesic and surveying provision of construction-and-mounting works ............. 128
6.3.5. Laying of permanent track ..................................................................................... 132
6.3.6. Observations of settelement of the ground surface, deformation of buildings
and underground facilities ............................................................................................... 132
6.3.7. Executive surveying documentation ...................................................................... 134
6.4. Engineering-geological provision ................................................................................ 135
6.4.1. General provisions ................................................................................................. 135
6.4.2. Scope of works at the construction of facilities by closed method ........................ 135
6.4.3. Scope of works at the construction of facilities by cut-and-cover method ............ 138
6.4.4. Local monitoring of the environment and natural-and-technical systems ............. 139
6.4.5. Office processing of the results of engineering-and-geological works ................. 139
Page 3 of 295

6.5. Cut-and-cover method of works ................................................................................... 140
6.5.1. General provisions ................................................................................................. 140
6.5.2. Digging works, shoring of pits and trenchs, preparation of the facilities’
foundations....................................................................................................................... 140
6.5.3. Erection of bearing structures made from prefabricated reinforced concrete........ 142
6.5.4. Erection of bearing structures made from in-situ reinforced concrete .................. 143
6.5.5. Backfilling of pits .................................................................................................. 145
6.6. Closed method of works ............................................................................................... 146
6.6.1. General provisions ................................................................................................. 146
6.6.2. Construction of shafts ............................................................................................ 146
6.6.3. Construction of the main line tunnels .................................................................... 149
6.6.4. Construction of stations ......................................................................................... 153
6.6.5. Construction of escalator tunnels ........................................................................... 154
6.7. Special methods of works ............................................................................................ 155
6.7.1. Dewatering ............................................................................................................. 155
6.7.2. Artificial freezing of grounds ................................................................................ 157
6.7.3. Injection grouting ................................................................................................... 159
6.8. Construction sites ......................................................................................................... 167
6.9. Superstructure и contact rail ........................................................................................ 170
6.10. Mounting of equipment .............................................................................................. 171
6.10.1. Preparation to execution of works ....................................................................... 171
6.10.2. Mounting works ................................................................................................... 172
6.10.3. Individual testing of equipment ........................................................................... 173
6.11. Sanitary-and-hygienic provision ................................................................................ 176
7. Commissioning ................................................................................................................... 176
7.1. Acceptance committees ................................................................................................ 176
7.2. Quality control, acceptance of construction works and facilities................................. 178
7.3. Start-up and adjustment works ..................................................................................... 180
7.4. Commissioning of the construction objects ................................................................. 181
Appendix 2А. Regulatory references ..................................................................................... 183
Appendix 2B. Terms, definitions and abbreviations .............................................................. 187
Appendix 4А. Act of the well plugging ................................................................................. 192
Appendix 5А. Manual on application of cables, wires and buses .......................................... 193
Appendix 5B. Station operation control system ..................................................................... 201
Appendix 5.10А. Transformers power calculation method ................................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 5.10B. Design parameters of electric drives of escalators ..................................... 207
Appendix 5.10В. Station passenger premises lighting installations calculation method ...... 209
Appendix 5.13А. Types and subscribers of the operative-technological communications.... 211
Appendix 5.14А. Composition, number, and norms of formation of subdivisions ............... Error! Bookm
Appendix 5.14B. Operation subdivisions personnel specialties. Production processes
groups. Schedules of works .................................................................................................... 216
Appendix 5.14C. Designation, area, and disposition of administrative, production, and
domestic premises at the station ............................................................................................. 219
Appendix 5.14D. Block of production premises at the level of the station platform.
Designation and area of the premises ..................................................................................... 221
Appendix 5.16А. List of premises and facilities with indication of categories on
explosion and fire hazard, and classes of fire hazardous zones ............................................. 222
Appendix 5.20А. Selection of the construction structures insulation type ........................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 5.20B. Chemical stability of bitumens and gudrones at the temperature of 25
°С in different medias ............................................................................................................. 226
Appendix 5.20C. Examples of tunnel structures protection ................................................... 227
Page 4 of 295

Appendix 5.20D. Approximate compositions of protective coatings .................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 6А. Allowable deviations of prefabricated lining real dimensions from the
designed values ....................................................................................................................... 228
Appendix 6.6А. Tunneling complexes ................................................................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 6.7.А1. Act of equipping of the dewatering well................................................... 233
Appendix 6.7.А2. Act of pumping of the dewatering well ................................................... 233
Appendix 6.7.А3. Act of commissioning of the dewatering installation .............................. 234
Appendix 6.7.А4. Act of the site readiness to execution of main works after the
completion of preliminary dewatering period ........................................................................ 234
Appendix 6.7.А5. Act of termination of the dewatering works ............................................. 235
Appendix 6.7.B1. Act of putting into operation of freezing system ...................................... 236
Appendix 6.7.B2. Act of the site readiness to execution of main works after the
completion of active dewatering period ................................................................................. 237
Appendix 6.7.B3. Act of termination of the freezing works ................................................. 237
Appendix 6.7.C1. Drilling works execution logbook ............................................................ 238
Appendix 6.7.C2. Logbook on the ground cementation ........................................................ 238
Appendix 6.7.C3. Logbook on injection of the urea solutions into the ground ..................... 238
Appendix 6.7.C4. Logbook of execution of works on the jet cementation of ground ........... 240
Appendix 6.7.C5. Act of the reference well testing .............................................................. 241
Appendix 6.7.C6. Act of the concealed ground injection works acceptance ........................ 241
Appendix 6.10А. Dimensions of holes and trenches for piping and air ducts laying in the
construction structures of buildings and facilities .................................................................. 242
Appendix 6.10.B1. Maximum allowable distances between the pipes fixing points ............. 243
Appendix 6.10.B2. Maximum allowable distances between the fixing points of wires
laid in the vertically installed tubings ..................................................................................... 243
Appendix 6.10.B3. Minimum allowable radiuses of the cable bends .................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 6.10.B4. Maximum allowable difference between the cable laying levels .......... Error! Bookm
Appendix 6.10.B5. Allowable cable pulling forces ............................................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 6.10.B6. Protocol of the wires, cables, and electrical equipment insulation
resistance testing at the rated voltage up to 1 KV ................................................................. 244
Appendix 6.10.B7. Protocol of the electrical equipment grounding resistance testing ........ 245
Appendix 6.10.B8. Instructions on the cable marking .......................................................... 245
Appendix 6.10.B9. Job specification on the execution of electric mounting works by
outside organizations .............................................................................................................. 255
Appendix 6.10.C1. Act of acceptance for adjustment ........................................................... 256
Appendix 6.10.C2. Act of acceptance for individual testing ................................................. 257
Appendix 6.10.C3. Act of individual testing ........................................................................ 257
Appendix 6.10.C4. Act of acceptance of ventilating installation to adjustment ................... 258
Appendix 6.10.C5. Act of hydrostatic or manometric testing of hermiticity ......................... 259
Appendix 6.10.C6. Act of testing of the on-site sewerage and water removal .................... 259
Appendix 6.10.C7. Act of completion of startup and commissioning works ........................ 260
Appendix 7А. List of documentation to be submitted at the commissioning of the
Underground Railroad construction objects ........................................................................... 261
Appendix 7B. Act of the working committee of readiness of completed construction
object (facility) for consideration by the State acceptance committee ................................... 264
Appendix 7C. Act of the State acceptance committee of the commissioning of completed
construction object .................................................................................................................. 266
Appendix 7D. Line certificate ................................................................................................ Error! Bookm
Appendix 7.2А. Logbook of execution of mining works ....................................................... 271
Appendix 7.2B. Logbook of execution of the concrete and reinforced concrete works ....... 271
Appendix 7.2C. Logbook of execution of works on hermetization of prefabricated tunnel
Page 5 of 295

lining at the closed method of works ...................................................................................... 272
Appendix 7.2D. Logbook of initial injection of the combo solution under the lining ........... 273
Appendix 7.2E. Logbook of control injection of the slurry under the lining ........................ 273
Appendix 7.2F. Logbook of execution of works on the glued water-proofing ...................... 273
Appendix 7.2G. Act of the concealed works execution ........................................................ 274
Appendix 7.2H. Act of acceptance of works on the arrangement of glued (or welded)
water-proofing ....................................................................................................................... 274
Appendix 7.2I. Act of acceptance of works on injection of solution under the lining .......... 276
Appendix 7.2J. Act of inspection of safety margins for the tunnel equipment ..................... 277
Appendix 7.2K. Directive of the working committee regarding the correction of
deviations of the tunnel equipment from the safety margins ................................................. 277
Appendix 7.3А. Act of the working committee regarding acceptance of the equipment
after individual testing ........................................................................................................... Error! Bookm
Appendix 7.3B. Act of the working committee regarding acceptance of the equipment
after complex testing ............................................................................................................. Error! Bookm
Appendix 7.3.C1. Act of acceptance of internal domestic-and-fire extinguishing and hot
water supply systems ............................................................................................................. 280
Appendix 7.3.C1-1. Act of testing of internal fire extinguishing water pipeline water
yield ....................................................................................................................................... 281
Appendix 7.3.C2. Act of commissioning of the heating system ........................................... 282
Appendix 7.3.C3. Act of commissioning of the system and discharges of the internal
sewerage ................................................................................................................................. 283
Appendix 7.3.C4. Act of commissioning of the system and discharges of the internal
drain ........................................................................................................................................ 283
Appendix 7.3.C5. Act of commissioning of lighting installations ........................................ 284
Appendix 7.3.D1. List of documents for the escalator commissioning ................................ 285
Appendix 7.3.D2. Act of correspondence of the escalator to the requirements of fire
safety ...................................................................................................................................... 286
Appendix 7.3.D3. Protocol of the survey measurements of installation of the escalator
run guides ............................................................................................................................... 286
Appendix 7.3.D4. Component list of hauling chains installed at the escalator ...................... 286
Appendix 7.3.D5. Act of testing of the hoisting-and-conveying equipment ......................... 287
Appendix 7.3E. Act of commissioning of the adjustment-free equipment ........................... 287
Appendix 7.3F. Certificate of ventilation system (air conditioning system) ........................ 288
Appendix 7.3G. Control of the electric corrosion preventive measures execution and
effectiveness .......................................................................................................................... 289
Appendix 7.3H. Logbook of the "rails-ground" transient resistance measurement .............. 294
Appendix 7.3I. Logbook of inspection of insulating joints and flanges ................................ 294
INTRODUCTION
The present summary of regulations has been elaborated in correspondence with the
general system of regulatory documents in the construction.
This document states recommended, accepted, and well-proved on practice provisions
developing and providing realization of the SNiP 32-02 (Construction Standards and
Regulations) requirements and other regulatory documents at the stages of engineering
researches, designing, construction, and commissioning of the newly constructed and
reconstructed Underground Railroad lines.
Specialists of the following organizations took part in the elaboration of the present summary
of regulations:
«Metrogiprotrans» OJSC – Kotov V.V., Panin B.V., Sazonov G.N., Shumakov N.I., Goulbe
Page 6 of 295

V.I., Vlasov I.S., Topilskiy P.I., Vlasyuk V.R., Zemelman А.М., Glebov V.А., Gusev F.V.,
Kabanova S.G., Nasibov А.М., Philippov V.Z., Dyakonov P.L., Korolyov Y.G., Petrova R.M.,
Basharina D.G., Plyukhina Т.А., Khilchenkov А.P., Zhukov V.G., Solodkova Е.М., Savelyeva
О.V., Kirik М.V., Shenderova I.Y., Ordynets G.Y.;
Russian Tunnel Association – Vlasov S.N., Bocharov V.F., Kostaryev S.А., Alikhashkin V.А.;
All-Russian Public Organization, Scientific-and-research center of tunnels and Underground
Railroads «Scientific-and-research institute of transport construction» OJSC – Merkhin V.Y.,
Vinogradov B.N., Kournavin S.А., Chebotayev V.V., Garber V.А., Cmirnova G.О., Ivanova
N.М., Nikonorov V.B., Golybev V.G.;
Sent-Petersburg branch of Federal State Unitary Enterprise «All-Russian Scientific-andresearch institute of fire prevention» of Ministry of Emergency Situations of Russia – Makhin
V.S., Bondarev V.F., Borozdin S.А.;
Independent Non-commercial Organization «Investments in Construction of Underground
Railroads» (Investstroymetro) – Krouck Y.Y.;
«Underground Railroad Tunnel Geodesy» (Metrotonnelgeodeziya) OJSC – Sokolov I.N.;
State Unitary Enterprise «Scientific-and-research and Design Institute of the Moscow General
Layout» - Sokolova L.F.;
State Sanitary-and-epidemiological supervision center on the Moscow Underground Railroad
- Doubrovskaya Т.А.;
State Unitary Enterprise «Moscow Underground Railroad» - Streltsov B.Y.;
State Unitary Enterprise «Scientific-and-research, project designing and technological
institute of concrete and reinforced concrete» - Rosental N.К.;
OJSC «VIZBAS» - Nikiforov K.P.;
OJSC «Moscow Underground Railroad Construction» - Yatskov B.I., Bogomolov G.М.;
OJSC «Special design-and-technological bureau «Construction of tunnels and Underground
Railroads»» - Simonov Y.F.;
CJSC «Engineering geology of historical territories» - Pashkin Y.М.;
Federal State Unitary Enterprise «All-Russian Scientific-and-research Institute of Railroad
Transport» of the Traffic Ministry of the Russian Federation - Kotelnikov А.V., Naumov А.V.;
State Unitary Enterprise «Moscow Scientific-and-research and design institute of typology
and experimental engineering» - Dobrovolskiy А.N.;
Gosstroy of Russia - Bovbel V.P.;
Federal Scientific-and-technical center of certification in the construction under the
Gosstroy of Russia – Khorin G.М.
SP 32-105-2004
SUMMARY OF REGULATIONS ON ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION
UNDERGROUND RAILROADS
1. APPLICATION AREA
The present summary of regulations covers the engineering researches, designing,
construction and commissioning of the new and reconstructed lines, separate facilities and
devices of the Underground Railroads.
2. REGULATORY REFERENCES, TERMS, DEFINITIONS, AND ABBREVIATIONS
The present summary of regulations applies the regulatory references, terms, definitions, and
abbreviations list of which is represented in the Appendix 2А.
3. GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.1. The line route in plan and profile should be assigned on the base of location of stations
in the passengers accumulation points, minimum passenger’s trip time consumption,
application of the longitudinal profile most cost-effective by the electric power consumption,
as well as taking into consideration the engineering-and-geological, geomorphologic, hydrogeological conditions and corrosiveness of media.
Page 7 of 295

3.2. One Electric depot should be constructed on the line having length less than 20 km (in
the double-line calculation), the second and the third Electric depots should be constructed on
the lines having lengths more than 20 km and more than 40 km, correspondingly.
It is allowed to apply one Electric depot for two lines with one-type rolling stock during
the first period of the second line operation.
3.3. The dead ends next to the stations and main line connection track in front of the
stations should be provided on the line in 5 - 8 km. The dead end length should be accepted
taking into consideration the possibility of location of two rolling stocks on the each line.
At the first startup section of the line having the length less than 20 km the rolling stock
technical maintenance point with production premises and domestic premises in one of dead
ends should be provided.
At the line length more than 20 km the second technical maintenance point should be
located next to station supposed to be operated as the end station for more than 5 years. In the
future the number of technical maintenance points on the line should be stipulated by
calculation.
It is not necessary to locate the technical maintenance point near the station close to which
construction of Electric depot is supposed.
3.4. The night storage of rolling stocks should be provided in the Electric depot and on the
station tracks of the line, with ensuring of rest conditions for locomotive crew in the aboveground buildings or in the station vestibules (at the level no lower than the ticket hall).
3.5. At the Underground Railroad lines the common automated system of fare payment and
control of the passengers’ passage to stations, automated train traffic control, control of
escalators and other production installations should be provided from the line and station
dispatcher centers.
The station operation control should be provided using the Station Operation Control
System (SOCS) according the Appendix 5B.
The line dispatcher centers should consist of branch dispatcher points, train traffic control,
electric power supply, escalators, electromechanical devices, as well as Dispatcher Points of
protection of public order and safety, and fire safety.
Dispatcher Point should be equipped with automated working places, telecontrol systems
and necessary types of dispatcher communications on the contemporary element base.
3.6. During the designing of the Underground Railroad lines the possibility of their putting
into operation by separate sections should be provided.
3.7. It is recommended to provide the State sanitary-and-epidemiological supervision
center, policlinic, and sanatoria type suburban preventative clinic for the Underground
Railroad.
3.8. Requirements of the present regulations should be considered together with
corresponding provisions of SNiP 32-02 and SP 32-106.
4. ENGINEERING RESEARCHES
4.1. Engineering-and-geological researches
4.1.1. Engineering-and-geological researches should be conducted at the stages of
elaboration of feasibility study (project) and working documentation.
N o t e : - Approximate dividing of the scope of works by the stages is, %: Feasibility study (project) - 40 50; working documentation - 60 - 40.

4.1.2. At the Feasibility study (project) elaboration stage the researches should be
conducted in the volume providing the obtaining of sufficient engineering-and-geological
material for:
- providing of opportunity for selection of optimal route driving version;
- selection of the structure types and working methods allowing to execute the
construction with minimum environmental effect;
- designing of the main line tunnels, stations, shafts, and other underground and aboveground facilities.
Page 8 of 295

4.1.3. At the working documentation elaboration stage the researches should be
conducted with the purpose of obtaining of detailed information regarding the engineeringand-geological conditions, stipulation of engineering-and-geological conditions of the
sections where the special methods of works should be applied, and preparation of the hydrogeological monitoring, where appropriate.
4.1.4. The researches should include the following main works:
- collection, generalization, and analysis of archive engineering-and-geological materials;
- reconnaissance of the terrain along the line route;
- metrological provision;
- driving of the exploration mine workings;
- field study of grounds;
- geophysical investigations;
- laboratory investigations of the ground properties and chemical composition of the
underground waters;
- office treatment of the research results and drawn up of the reports.
In complicated engineering-and-geological conditions, where appropriate, it is
recommended to conduct scientific-and-research works.
4.1.5. In the consequence of conducted investigations and researches the following items
should be defined and evaluated:
- geographic situation, orographic, hydrographic and climatic conditions of the
construction region;
- geological structure (age, bedding conditions, composition of rocks), geomorphology,
tectonics, neo-tectonics;
- hydro-geological conditions;
- geological processes and phenomenon (karst, ancient and current erosion processes,
rockslides, rock weathering, suffusion, seismicity, settlement);
- folded and faulting deformations, rock fissuring;
- geo-cryological conditions;
- presence of petroleum products in grounds;
- physical-and-mechanical characteristics of grounds;
- aggressiveness of underground waters and grounds;
- temperature of underground waters and grounds;
- gas content (composition, nature, and level of occurrence).
Prognosis of development should be conducted, and the hazard degree of negative
engineering-and-geological processes and phenomenon developing in response to the
construction of Underground Railroad (ground and surface deformations, thixotropic,
suffusion and karst-suffusion phenomenon, settlements) should be evaluated during the
investigation process.
4.1.6. Methodology, composition, and scope of investigation works should be stipulated
by the investigation program. Herewith characteristics of designed structure, stages of designand-research works, exploration degree, and complexity of the construction conditions should
be taken into consideration.
The categories of complexity of the engineering-and-geological conditions (simple,
medium complicated, and complicated) should be defined in accordance with SP 11-105.
4.1.7. During the investigations the special attention should be paid to revelation of:
- zones of weakness in the mass (ball clay bands and water-saturated argillic-arenaceous
deposits, specific grounds, strongly destructured rocky grounds);
- areas with high filtration ability of grounds and high hydrostatic pressure heads;
- grounds and underground waters having high level of aggressiveness relating to
construction structure materials;
- explosive and harmful for the people health medias (availability of gas, radioactivity,
Page 9 of 295

grounds saturated with harmful substances).
In the process of revelation of unfavorable for construction areas their distribution limits,
intensity of development, degree of their influence on the construction conditions and
structure operation should be defined.
4.1.8. As the main investigation method the exploration wells drilling with the intact
structure ground corn sampling should be applied.
In consequence of the drilling works the information regarding geological opencast,
presence of water-bearing stratums and underground water level should be obtained, and
opportunity for ground and water sampling for laboratory investigations should be provided.
It is not recommended to execute the well drilling directly under the designed
underground facilities.
Approximate distances between the wells on the line route after execution of
investigations for all stages of designing should correspond to the table 4.1.
T a b l e 4.1
Approximate distance between wells, m, on the line route
Line burial
Engineering-and-geological conditions
according the SP 11-105
shallow, construction method
deep
Cut-and-cover
Closed
Simple
120 - 150
100 - 120
70 - 90
Medium complicated
80 - 120
70 - 100
40 - 70
Complicated
40 - 80
40 - 70
Less than 40
N o t e – The scopes of drilling for experimental works, hydro-geological monitoring, for engineering-andgeological researches at the shafts and stations construction sections, engineering-and-geological anomalies
represented by tectonic faults, buried river valleys and sectors of specific grounds distribution are not taken into
account in this table. The scopes of these works should be stipulated by separate program.

4.1.9. It is recommended to accept the rocky ground faults degree index according the
RQD (Rock Quality Designation) method (ratio of the amount of intact corn samples having
the length of 10 cm and more, to the length of investigated well interval, %) by the table 4.2.
Table 4.2
RQD Value
90 - 100
75 - 90
50 - 75
25 - 50
0 - 25

Ground conditions
Intact
Negligibly faulted
Slightly faulted
Strongly faulted
Very strongly faulted

4.1.10. The wells drilled during the investigations process subject to obligatory liquidation
with plugging of the borehole. The acts of the wells plugging (Appendix 4А) with indication
of the plugging method should be attached to the investigation report.
4.1.11. In case the exploration well is located in the opencast of designed deep burial
openings, or in case the boreholes are located at the distance less than 10m from the
structure’s outline, the acts of plugging and the well coordinates should be directed to the
construction organization for elaboration of special project for execution of works in the well
location area.
4.1.12. In case the urban planning situation does not allow to drill required number of
exploration wells, the shortage of them should be compensated by other investigation methods
(geophysical, drilling of exploratory adits, and drilling of wells from these adits).
4.1.13. It is recommended to conduct the geophysical researches in combination with other
research methods.
Selection of the type of geophysical researches should be stipulated in correspondence with
given tasks, urban housing density, as well as availability and level of disturbances emerged
in consequence with the transport traffic (noise, vibration), and electrical installations
influence. The results of geophysical researches should be correlated with data of other
researches and represented in the report.
Page 10 of 295

4.1.14. Hydro-geological researches provide obtaining of the initial data for definition of
water inflow in the constructed structures, dimensions of the future cones of influence,
methods of execution of construction works, possible barraging effect of the constructed
structures, direction and speed of the ground waters moving, hydrostatic pressure head
effecting to the lining, as well as temperature, chemical composition and aggressiveness of
underground waters relating to the structure material. With this purpose the experimental
pumping, charging, and filling, as well as geophysical researches should be conducted.
Evaluation of hydrostatic pressure effect on the structures should be defined on the base of
long-term prognosis of the underground waters regime.
4.1.15. The field researches of the ground properties should be executed according to the
special program, preferably at the construction sites of shallow tunnels.
4.1.16. Except from the stipulated by SP 11-105 physical-and-mechanical parameters of the
grounds, where appropriate, compression and shear wave velocities, Poisson’s ratios,
coefficients of heat conductivity, specific and volumetric heat capacity, breaking stress, clays
relative swelling and swelling pressure, flow properties, elastic coefficients, grounds
abrasiveness and adhesiveness should be defined.
On the results of the engineering-and-geological researches the technical report containing
the text and graphical sections requirements to which are represented in the SNiP 11-02 and SP
11-105 should be compiled.
In the process of office treatment works the following items should be compiled:
- Physical and geological map;
- Solid map (where appropriate);
- Engineering-and-geological opencasts by the route axis at a horizontal scale of 1:2000
and vertical scale of 1:200;
- Engineering-and-geological opencasts by the route axis at a horizontal scale of 1:5000
and vertical scale of 1:500 for al route versions;
- Engineering-and-geological opencasts by the shafts and stations.
The report on the conducted researches should give the full picture of the geological
structure in the area of designed line, engineering-and-geological, and hydro-geological
conditions of the construction.
4.1.17. In case the engineering-and-geological researches are executed in connection with
the reconstruction design of stations related to the architectural monuments, the change of
geological and ecological conditions of the urban environment for the period of the station
operation should be defined.
4.2. Engineering-and geodesic researches
4.2.1. Engineering-and-geodesic researches should provide obtaining of topographic-andgeodesic materials and data regarding the situation, conformation (including the waterways,
water reservoirs and water spaces bottoms), existing buildings and structures (above ground,
underground) and other planning elements, required for complex evaluation of natural and
man-triggered conditions within the designed line route, substantiation of designing,
construction and operation of the Underground Railroad.
4.2.2. The basic initial data for execution of works, research tasks, and requirements to
accuracy, reliability and completeness of topographic-geodesic materials should be defined in
the technical assignment.
4.2.3. Geodesic devices used for the researches, should be certified and tested in
correspondence with the requirements of regulatory documents of the Committee of the
Russian Federation for Standardization, Metrology and Certification.
4.2.4. The researches at the stage of development of feasibility study for the construction
should be executed for all versions of designed routes.
The scope of works should include:
- Collection and analysis of topographic (engineering-and-topographic) maps and plans at a
Page 11 of 295

scales between 1:5000 and 1:2000, aero- and space photogrammetric plans, land organization
and forest organization plans, last-years research materials on the development of
fundamental geodesic nets, land and urban planning, and other cadastres;
- Investigation of points of the State geodesic fundamental net and execution of its bridging
or development, where appropriate;
- Updating of topographic maps and plans in case they do not correspond to current
conditions of the situation, conformation, and location of underground communications;
- Elaboration of surveyor' pickup and execution of topographic survey in case of lack of
required topographic materials;
- Measuring of depths of rivers and water reservoirs, leveling of the waterways bottom
surface and compiling of longitudinal profiles for the investigated section of the river, and
cross profiles for metering sections;
- Stacking and connection of the engineering-and-geological openings and other
observation points;
- Geodesic works on studying of dangerous natural and techno-natural processes (karst,
slope processes, marginal erosion of rivers, seas, lakes, and water-storage reservoirs, as well
as cases of tapping and waterlogging of territory);
- Studying of materials on deformation of buildings and structure foundations on the
ground surface, occurring before the beginning of construction;
- Reconnaissance investigation of the route versions and structures location places in case
of necessity of visual (aero-visual) inspections with the purpose of additional inspection of
reliability of existing materials;
- Continuous-strip photography for compiling of large-scale plans, planned-high-altitude
connection, and decoding of aerial photography;
- Elaboration of compilation photography survey and execution of topographic
photography of reference and complicated zones at the scales between 1:5000 and 1:2000 in
case of lack of the aerial photography data;
- Alignment of tacheometrical traverses with piquet set in the specific terrain and situation
places.
4.2.5. The photography band width along the route should be defined taking into
consideration reserve for the construction and environmental conditions of the territory.
Increasing of the photography band width at the sections with dangerous natural and technonatural processes is allowed.
4.2.6. The office routing should be conducted according the topographic maps and aerial
photos at the scale of 1:25000, or plans at the scale of 1:10000 using the materials of space
photography. At the complicated sections the topographic photography should be executed at
the scales of 1:5000 - 1:2000.
4.2.7. The technical report should be compiled in the following composition:
- General information regarding the physical-geographic and geological specifics of the
construction region, and topographic-geodesic knowledge of the area of researches;
- Scheme of the created geodesic planned-high-altitude base, cartogram of topographicand-geodesic knowledge on the construction route, outlines of fixed points of the geodesic
planned-high-altitude base, as well as catalogues of their coordinated and altitudes;
- Underground structure plans;
- Plans and longitudinal profiles by the route versions (according the agreement with the
customer the longitudinal profiles can be omitted);
- Diagrams of observations of settlements and deformations of structures and ground
surface;
- Information regarding the methodology and technology of executed works, and regarding
the conduction of technical control and commissioning;
- Conclusions on the results of works;
Page 12 of 295

- Schemes of location of geological openings or extracts from the map, catalogue of
coordinates and altitudes.
The researches at the stage of the project development should provide compiling of the
following items:
- Corrected situation plan at the scales between 1:25000 and 1:10000 with indication of
existing and designed communications and technical networks;
- Project of engineering preparation of the construction sites with indication of existing and
condemned buildings and structures;
- Drawings of the line plan and vertical planning of the territory;
- Measures on the environmental protection;
- Materials of the geodesic provision of the construction.
The following should be executed during the researches:
- Collection and analysis of additional topographic-and-geodesic materials, including
materials and data of the last years’ researches;
- Building (development) of the foundation and planned-high-altitude geodesic
photography net;
- Topographic photography (updating of plans) at the scales of 1:5000 - 1:500;
- Drawn up and multiplication of the engineering-and-topographic plans;
- Geodesic provision of other kinds of engineering researches, including the investigation
of dangerous natural and techno-natural processes;
- Geodesic works for investigation of the ground surface moving in the areas of
development of current fault tectonic displacements;
- Office treatment of the materials and drawn up of technical report.
4.2.8. The researches at the stage of elaboration of the working documentation should
provide obtaining of additional topographic-and-geodesic materials and data for updating of
the route general layout, correction and detailing of the project solutions.
The composition of researches includes:
- Collection and treatment of the topographic-and-geodesic, cartographic materials for the
last years;
- Analysis and updating of the materials executed at the previous stages of designing;
- Reconnaissance investigations of the route sections and structures along the designed line
route;
- Field routing (the route survey stationing);
- Planned-high-altitude connection of the route to the State (foundation) geodesic net
points;
- Topographic photography of the terrain along the route (photography of current changes
if the plans are available) at the scales of 1:1000 - 1:500, additional photography of passages,
crossings, and newly emerged (after the corrections for the project development have been
made) engineering communications;
- Connection of geological exploration wells, openings, geophysical and other points of the
engineering researches;
- Instrumental observations of the settlements and deformations of buildings, structures,
and ground surface before the beginning of the construction;
- Drawn up and multiplication of the engineering-and-topographic plans;
- Geodesic provision of other kinds of researches;
- Drawn up of the technical report.
The scope of works at the field routing includes:
- Alignment of survey (tacheometrical) traverses along the route axis, survey and picketage
with stationing of horizontal curves;
- Leveling of the route and installation of checking points;
- Photography of spurs in the piquet points and all plus (critical) points;
Page 13 of 295

- Large-scale topographic photography of the terrain along the route with subsequent
cameral routing in the existing coordinates and altitudes system.
4.2.9. The scope of researches for the construction-and-mounting works provision
includes:
- Definition of design situation of the construction object at the terrain and in the
underground openings;
- Development of the foundation planned-high-altitude geodesic ranging net on the surface
and in the underground openings;
- Development of the planned-high-altitude bridging and approach nets along the route;
- Orientation of the underground surveying net;
- Surveying works on the ranging and connecting in correspondence with the project
documentation;
- Geodesic-and-surveying control of observation of geometric parameters of structures
during the construction process;
- Executive geodesic-and-surveying photography of the planned-high-altitude position of
the constructed structures and engineering communications;
- Observations of the settlements and deformations of the surface buildings and structures
and underground facilities, including execution of local monitoring, as well as dangerous
natural and techno-natural processes;
- Geodesic-and-surveying works on the actual definition of concealed underground
facilities during the construction, maintenance, and other kinds of works;
- Drawn up of executive schemes of the underground and above ground facilities, and other
technical documentation.
4.3. Engineering-and-ecological researches
4.3.1. It is advisably to conduct the engineering-and-ecological researches in the scope of
engineering-and-geological researches according the SP 11-102.
4.3.2. The technical assignment for execution of researches should contain the general data
regarding the location and length of the route (including its versions), shallow and deep burial
sections, location of stations and other facilities.
The scope of researches includes:
- Generalization of published and fund materials regarding the environmental conditions,
availability of archeological objects and historical and cultural monuments, analysis of
regulatory-legislative documentation;
- Observations along the route for revelation of possible sources and traces of harmful
impurities;
- Testing of soils, grounds, surface and underground waters and definition of toxic and
harmful biological components there;
- Gas geochemical researches of made-up grounds and dumps;
- Evaluation of radiation conditions;
- Evaluation of physical effects from outside sources;
- Analysis of green plantings conditions;
- Office treatment of materials and technical report.
4.3.3. The scope of researches at the stage of feasibility study development should be
enough for substantiation of spatial-and-planning and constructive solutions assuring the
minimization of the ecological risks and prevention of unfavorable or unconvertible
consequences.
The scope of researches includes:
- Evaluation of the ecological conditions in the considering area. The following should be
revealed here:
а) Availability of harmful impurities in the air, soil, underground and surface waters, in the
water reservoirs crossed by the route;
Page 14 of 295

b) Availability and possible influence of dumps, explosive and gas hazardous medias,
traces of the petroleum products;
c) Existing and designation of protected territories, industrial enterprises, settling
reservoirs, tailing dumps;
d) Presence and sources of aggressive odor. The soils accumulating these substances
should be tested and investigated by the integrated index of chemical pollutions;
- Evaluation of physical effects (noise, vibration, electric and magnetic fields) with
revelation of the main sources of harmful influence, their intensity and discomfort areas,
electromagnetic field component, amplitude level and frequency composition of vibration
from the industrial, transport, and domestic sources;
- Characteristics of the radiation conditions, including the evaluation of the gammaradiation by the equivalent dose degree and radon hazard by the radon flux density and mantriggered radionuclides. In case of revelation of the radioactive anomalies higher than 0,3
microsieverts per hour, and equivalent balanced radon activity higher than 100 Bq/cub.m,
their outlining should be conducted, and sources of contamination should be found;
- Analysis of the green plantings conditions:
а) Evaluation of their stability, recoverability, possibility of degradation;
b) Definition of the area of green planting territories liquidated during the construction;
c) Proposals on the safety and compensational measures;
- Prognosis of possible changes of ecological conditions due to the construction,
preliminary evaluation of the ecological risks, and recommendations on taking of the
environmental protection measures on the base of maximum permissible concentrations of
contaminations.
On the researches data the «Environmental protection» section of the feasibility study will
be elaborated.
4.3.4. At the stage of elaboration of the working documentation the scope of researches
includes:
- Evaluation of the designed object influence on the environment during its construction
and operation;
- Evaluation of possible harmful effect of media (chemical composition of grounds and
waters, their corrosion activity, composition of the atmosphere, presence of aggressive gases,
sulfate-reducing bacteria, radon, high levels of noise and vibration, electromagnetic and
ionizing radiations) on the constructors, operating personnel, construction structures of the
designed facilities;
- Development of recommendations on environmental protection measures and recovery of
the environment.
4.3.5. Sanitary-epidemiological, medical-biological, hydro-biological, geophysical, geochemical, radiation-ecological works and researches should be conducted by specializing
organizations.
4.3.6. Technical report on the results of researches should be drawn up in the following
scope:
- Introduction: short data regarding the designed object, substantiation, kinds, scopes, and
methods of researches, work execution periods, etc;
- Knowledge of the ecological conditions on the materials:
а) Governmental authorities executing the control in the sphere of environmental
protection, and conduction of the ecological researches;
b) Engineering-and-ecological researches for the last years;
c) Analogous objects in the same engineering-and-geological and landscape-climatic
conditions;
- Short characteristics of environmental and man-triggered conditions:
а) Climatic and landscape conditions;
Page 15 of 295

b) Protected territories (status, value, designation, location);
c) Geo-morphological, hydrological, geological, hydro-geological and engineering-andgeological conditions;
- Short characteristics of the objects of historical and cultural heritage: their conditions,
perspectives of their saving and restoration;
- Characteristics of the extracted ground and construction wastes, their transporting and
storage.
4.3.7. It is recommended to include the following information in the technical report on the
results of researches at the stage of feasibility study:
- Current ecological conditions of the territory, including the data on waterways, sanitary
protection areas, green plantings, on the radiation conditions, atmospheric air, emissions of
harmful substances and near-ground concentrations of contaminating elements, chemical and
other impurities in the soil;
- Preliminary prognosis of the possible unfavorable environmental changes due to the
construction and operation of the Underground Railroad;
- Recommendations on the prevention and reduction of the unfavorable consequences,
restoration and enhancement of the environment.
4.3.8. It is recommended to include the following information in the technical report on the
results of researches at the stage of elaboration of the working documentation:
- Corrected characteristics of the chemical, physical, biological and other factors of the
media;
- Corrected component-wise indices of possible disturbance of the media, corrected
boundaries, dimensions and configuration of the zones of influence.
4.3.9. The appendices to the technical report depending on the given tasks should include
description of openings and wells, tables containing the investigation results on the
composition of soils and waters, tally sheets of the green plantings, and other actual materials.
4.3.10. The graphical section of the technical report applicably to the designing stage
should include the actual material maps, current and prognosticated ecological conditions, and
other auxiliary materials at the scales of 1:10000 - 1:500 with necessary legends, crosssections, and additions.
On the map (scheme) of the current ecological conditions the landscape types, dangerous
impurity sources and their characteristics, ways of their migration and accumulation areas,
especially protected areas, objects of historical and cultural heritage, results of geochemical,
radiation and other researches should be reflected.
On the map (scheme) of the prognosticated ecological conditions the expected changes of
the environmental components, dynamic of possible distribution of different harmful
impurities should be reflected.
At the compiling of ecological maps (schemes) the landscape, geological, engineering-andgeological, geochemical, hydro-geological, soil toxic substances prognosis maps,
dendroplans, etc, should be used.
It is allowable to compile the common map (engineering-and-ecological) of the current
ecological conditions of the territory with elements of prognosis, and to bring out the part of
information to the auxiliary schemes.
4.3.11. At the line route where during the construction working process burial mounds,
interments, and other archeological objects can be affected, the engineering-and-archeological
researches should be conducted using the historical-archive materials.
The researches at the stage of feasibility study should be conducted according the
corresponding program and with preliminary diggings. It is possible to execute the
construction works without preliminary diggings, but with the obligatory participation of
archeologists.
4.3.12. At the sections where the designed structures can effect on the environment
Page 16 of 295

especially sensible to the external influences (conservation areas, water conservation districts,
permafrost soils) the stationary observations can be provided (local ecological monitoring).
5. ENGINEERING
5.1. Traffic and carrying capacity
5.1.1. The traffic and carrying capacity of the line for the operating periods according to
the clause 3.13 of the SNiP 32-02 should be defined depending on the calculated number of
passengers in the train at the most loaded run, and at the maximum carriage hours (peak
hours).
At the definition of the line traffic in the peak hours (number of the train pairs per hour,
and number of subway cars in a train) the car occupancy should be accepted on the base of
calculation where all seat places are occupied by passengers, and 3,5 standing passengers
occupy each 1 m2 of the free area of the passenger compartment floor.
5.1.2. The line capacity, cross dimensions of passages at the sections of passenger
walkways, number of entries, escalators, check-points, cash booths and cash machines should
be stipulated by means of calculation using the value of 15-minute passengers flow at the
peak hours for the operating periods, according to the clause 3.13 of the SNiP 32-02. The track
sections capacity should be accepted by the Table 5.1.1.
T a b l e 5.1.1
Track section
Track width, m
Capacity, passengers/hour, no less than
Horizontal track:
Single-direction running
1,0
4000
Double-direction running
1,0
3400
Doorway
0,8
3200
Manual ticket sale booth
800
Check-point:
Automated, at the entrance
0,6
См. примечание
Automated, at the exit
0,6
2500
Manual, at the entrance
0,8
2300
Escalator
1,0
8200
Staircase:
Single-direction moving up
1,0
3000
Single-direction moving down
1,0
3500
Double-direction moving up and down
1,0
3200
N o t e – The capacity should be accepted according the technical conditions of the applied automated checkpoint design.

The value of the 15-minute passengers flow should be calculated on the base of maximum
expected passenger flow taking into account the ratio of irregularity of their distribution
during one hour:
а) for interchange and temporary end stations, for stations situated near the railway and bus
terminals, stadiums, at the places of crossing of considerable number of urban transport
routes, concentration of enterprises and organizations - 1,4;
b) for other stations - 1,2.
5.1.3. The capacity of adjacent sections of the passenger walkways at the station and in the
passage between stations should be the same.
At the track sections being the evacuation ways outside or to the adjacent station, it is not
recommended to restrict the cross dimensions of passages.
In case there are sections of the passenger walkways having different capacity, the
determinative is the section having the minimum capacity value.
5.2. Plan and longitudinal profile
5.2.1. At the place of adjacency of straight sections of the line the circular curve radiuses
should be no less than, m:
а) For the main and station tracks - 600;
b) For the connecting tracks - 150.
At the difficult conditions the radius values can be decreased to 300m and 100m,
Page 17 of 295

correspondingly.
5.2.2. The distance from the ground surface to the top of the underground station structure
should be no less than the thickness of the road carpet and heat-insulating layers.
Over the main line tunnels, at the sections of crossing of arterial streets and roads this
distance should be accepted to be no less than 3 m, at the other places decreasing of the
distance is allowed providing that the tunnels are protected from the freezing and there is
opportunity for arrangement of the road carpet over them.
5.2.3. The track switches should be located at the straight track sections having the slope
no more than 5 ‰; in the difficult conditions - having the slope no more than 10 ‰. The
distance from the starting points of curvatures in the plan, as well as from the vertical
curvatures in the profile to the center of the track switch should be no less than 20 m. The
distance from the center of the track switch to the beginning of the station platform should be
no less than 25 m.
5.2.4. The straight and curve main line track sections in the plan having the radius of 2000
m and less, as well as compound circular curvatures of different radiuses should be adjoined
by means of easement curves lengths of which should be accepted by the Table 5.2.1.
T a b l e 5.2.1
Main line tracks

Connecting tracks

Train traffic
Train traffic speed,
speed, km/h, at
Elevation Length of
Curve
Length of
km/h, at unsuppressed
Elevation of
unsuppressed
of outing easement
radius,
easement
acceleration, m/s2
outing rail, m
rail, m curve, m
m
curve, m acceleration, m/s2
-0,4
0
+0,4
0
+0,7
3000
125
600
0 - 60
75
2000
10
20 - 30
40
110
500
0 - 60
65
1500
20
20 - 40
50
100
400
0 - 60
60
1200
40
20 - 50
60
100
350
0 - 60
55
1000
60
30 - 70
70
100
300
0 - 60
50
800
80
40 - 80
30
70
95
250
0 - 60
45
600
100
50 - 80
40
70
90
200
10
0 - 60
10
45
500
120
60 - 60
45
70
85
175
30
0 - 60
20
45
400
120
60 - 80
40
60
75
150
40
0 - 60
20
45
350
120
60 - 80
40
60
70
125
70
0 - 60
25
45
300
120
60 - 80
35
55
65
100
110
0 - 60
30
45
Notes
1. Elevation of outing rail at the main line tracks should be provided outside the borders of the station
platform.
2. The easement curves should be pegged by clothoid.
3. If possible, bigger values should be accepted for easement curves at the main line tracks.
Curve
radius,
m

5.2.5. At the track curvatures, excluding the station tracks within the car inspection pits,
track switches and connecting tracks, as well as tracks within the station platforms, the outer
rail laying should be provided with elevation over the inner rail.
The elevation of the outer rail in tunnels and at the closed above ground sections should be
provided by means of elevation of the outer rail to a half of required elevation value and
lowering of the inner rail to the same value, at the open above ground sections - by means of
elevation of the outer rail to the full value of the required elevation.
In case the curvature is located partially in the tunnel, and partially at the open aboveground section the elevation of the outer rail should be arranged in the same way as for the
curvatures located in tunnels.
The branch of the outer rail elevation should be provided along the easement curve, and in
case of the easement curve absence – on the circular curvature and on the straight section
adjacent to the circular curvature.
The slope of the branch of the outer rail elevation should be accepted to be no more than
2‰ per the both rails, for difficult conditions - 3‰.
Page 18 of 295

The value of the outer rail elevation is represented in the Table 5.2.1.
5.2.6. It is allowed to adjoin the compound circular curvatures at the main line tracks
without the easement curves providing that
 1
1 
1
 −  ≤
,
 R1 R2  1500
where R1 and R2 are radiuses of the first and second curvatures.
At the connecting tracks it is allowed to adjoin the straight and curve sections, as well as
compound circular curvatures without the easement curves.
The length of circular curvature having the constant value of the outer rail elevation should
be no less than 15 m.
The length of the straight section not having the outer rail elevation should be accepted to
be no less than, m:
а) For the main line tracks - 20, in difficult conditions - 15;
b) For the connecting tracks - 15.
5.2.7. The longitudinal slope of the underground and closed above ground line sections
should be no less than 3‰. In cases of substantiation it is allowed to locate separate line
sections at the horizontal site. Herewith the longitudinal slope of the gutter bottom should be
no less than 2‰.
The longitudinal slope of the underground and closed above ground line sections should be
no more than 40‰.
In difficult conditions at the underground and closed above ground sections with the total
length no more than 1500 m that can be separated by station or run having the length up to
500 m, it is allowed to accept the longitudinal slope no more than 45‰ in case of this section
has no outer rail elevation branch, and no more than 43‰ in case it has such branch. Where
appropriate, the train traffic speed at these sections should be limited using technical facilities.
At the 1500 m total length of the section with a slope of 45‰, the sections adjacent to its
ends should be located at the slopes no more than 20‰ having the length no less than 1500 m
each.
Station tracks designated for turn-around and storage of trains should be located at the 3‰
slope with elevation toward the station.
Adjacency of two oppositely directed elements of the longitudinal profile with more than
5‰ slope should be fulfilled by means of element with no more than 5 ‰ slope.
The straight adjacent longitudinal profile elements at the algebraic difference between the
slope values equal to 2 ‰ or more should adjoin in vertical plane using the circular curvatures
having the following radiuses: 3000 m – at the main line tracks near station; 5000 m - at the
main line tracks of runs; 1500 m – at the connecting tracks. For difficult conditions it is
allowed to decrease the vertical curvature radiuses at the main line tracks near stations to 2000
m, at the runs - to 3000 m.
The longitudinal profile element length should be no less than long-term calculated train
length; the length of the straight insert between the adjacent curvatures should be no less than
50m.
5.2.8. At the bridges and overhead roads the combination of the plan and longitudinal
profile should be accepted the same with the other line sections.
5.2.9. At the stations with gridiron for turn-around and storage of trains one or two station
tracks should be provided.
The station track length should be defined as the distance from the track switch center to
the stop bar.
The station track length for turn-around of trains and storage of one rolling stock at the
night time should be 85 m more than the accepted perspective train length.
The station track length for turn-around of trains and storage of several rolling stocks at the
night time should be stipulated as the sum of accepted perspective train lengths and the
Page 19 of 295

following distances, m:
а) Between the rolling stocks - 5;
b) From the rolling stock to the stop rail - 7, in case of availability of Technical
Maintenance Point - 15;
c) From the track switch center to the first rolling stock in the night storage - 35.
The length of designated for rolling stocks storage dead end main line track next to the
temporary end station should be defined as the sum of accepted train lengths and the
following distances, m:
а) Between the rolling stocks - 5;
b) From the rolling stock to the stop bar - 7;
c) Additionally, at the facing train traffic on the track switch to the station track - 47, at the
trailing traffic - 22.
The track length should be multiple of 12,5 m.
The safety track length should be no less than 135 m, the length of the track not used with
the mentioned purpose should be no less than 47 m.
In case of application of other schemes of station tracks for turn-around and storage of
trains the indicated above distances should be observed.
5.2.10. At the section of station tracks designated for turn-around of trains, the service
platform the length of which should be 11 m more than the calculated maximum of the train
length should be located. The beginning of the platform at the distance of 25,6 m from the
track switch center, with the width - 1100 mm, and the height - 1200 mm from the level of rail
heads should be accepted.
In case of two station tracks the platform should be located between the tracks, in case of
one track - on the right side of the track in the direction of the train traffic from the station.
At the trains turn-around using the temporary end station main line track to the tunnel the
temporary service platform should be provided.
The lavatory and rubbish bin should be located in the end of the service platform.
5.2.11. The car inspection pit should be located along the axis of each station track.
Dimensions of the pit should be as follows, m:
а) Width - 1,2;
b) Length between the bottom stairs of the access - 2 m more than calculated maximum of
the train length;
c) Length of access in the plan - 1,5;
d) Depth from the rail head level in the circular single-line tunnels - 1,2; in the square
tunnels and circular double-line tunnels - 1,4.
It is allowed to locate the car inspection pit next to the area of the rolling stock turnaround. The service platform in this case should not be provided.
The car inspection pit should not be provided in the dead ends on the extension of the main
line tracks temporary used for turn-around and storage of rolling stock.
5.2.12. The passages between the single-line tunnels should be provided in correspondence
with the clause 5.16.25 of the SNiP 32-02.
5.2.13. It is allowed to break the walkway to the length up to 30 м in the main line tunnels
having internal diameter of 5,1 and 5,2 m according to the GOST 23961 in 300 - 350 m for
allocation of kilometer-by-kilometer rail stock.
5.3. Stations
5.3.1. Planning solutions of stations and interchange facilities, where possible, should
provide organization of the passenger traffic without crossing of the passenger flows, and
maximal decreasing of the air motion effect from the train traffic.
5.3.2. Passenger platforms of the stations can be of island, side, or island and side type.
The length of the boarding part of platform should be no less than 8 m more than the
calculated perspective train length.
Page 20 of 295

The length of the dead ends of the boarding part of platform for the deep burial stations
should not exceed 1/3 of the platform length, and should be defined taking into consideration
the condition where the clearing of passengers at this section should be executed for the
period no more than minimum interval between the trains, and within the calculated period of
passengers evacuation from the station according to the clause 5.16 of the SNiP 32-02.
5.3.3. The width of platforms, corridors, and staircases should be accepted according to the
clause 5.1 and the Table 5.3.1.
T a b l e 5.3.1
Parameter
Value, m, no less than
Width of island type station platform:
shallow, above-ground, single-vault deep burial
10,0
The same, column type, deep burial
12,0
Width of side type platform
4,0
Distance from the platform edge:
To the column of the shallow and deep burial stations
1,6
To the column of the deep burial stations
1,6
To the piers and walls of opening-free parts of stations
2,9
Width of the passage under the platform staircase at minimal altitude of 2 m
2,0
Width of the passages between the side and middle halls of the pier-type station
2,5
Width of the staircase between the island type platform and vestibule or middle hall
6,5
Width of open staircase with covering between the floors of production, domestic, and
0,8
other premises
The same, width of corridors
1,2
N o t e – values are indicated for distances to the structures’ lining.

The length of the passenger walkways from ticket booths to the Automated Check-point,
from the Automated Check-point to escalators, and from escalators to the platform should be
no less than 5m, and no more than 10 m.
The height of passages along the passenger flow axis should be equal to 2,5m; in case of
substantiation – no less than 2,1 m.
The height of the production, domestic, and other premises to the bottom of the arch
structure should be no less than 2,5m, the premises for allocation of the train traffic control
and communication equipment - 2,75m; in case of substantiation the local decrease of height
to 2,1m is allowed.
The height of passage at the arch-shaped roof should be no less than 1,7 m.
5.3.4. If there is the technical opportunity, the elevator to the station platform should be
provided directly from the ground surface in the most approachable for disabled persons
place. The pavilion should be arranged over the entrance to the elevator, or should be built-in
other buildings or structures. In case it is impossible, the elevator to the shallow station
platform should be provided from the level of ticket hall of the vestibule, and at the staircases
by the each side of pedestrian crossing adjacent to the vestibule with elevator the lifting
platforms for disabled persons should be installed according to the PB (Safety Rules) 10-403.
At the deep burial stations the elevator from the ground surface to the corridor located at
the intermediate level, and the lifting platforms for disabled persons from the corridor to the
platform should be provided.
The elevator shafts and halls (tambours) at the intermediate level platform should be
equipped with the boundary fire barriers, according to the clause 5.16 of SNiP 32-02, Table 3.
5.3.5. At the disabled persons walkway the possibility of free passage and wheelchair
drive, handrails, doors of required width with fixed opening, and call of accompanying person
should be provided.
5.3.6. In the decoration of the passenger premises the materials decreasing the noise and
vibration level, and observance of fire safety parameters according to the clauses 5.17 and
5.16 of the SNiP 32-02 should be provided.
In case the station structures are located in watered grounds, the decorative lining should
Page 21 of 295

be installed at the bearing construction structures’ carry-off.
5.3.7. At the development of spatial-planning solutions the disposal of the premises groups
by the way of blocks: (ticket, domestic – with continuous and temporary residence of
personnel, production and health protection premises should be provided. The blocks should
be separated from each other and from the passenger premises by the boundary fire barriers,
and should be provided in correspondence with the Appendix 5.14В and PB 10-77.
The drop ceilings should be provided in the service corridors for allocation of
technological communications behind them.
5.3.8. In the passenger premises and premises with continuous residence of the operating
personnel of the deep burial stations the water diversion umbrellas should be provided.
In the production premises of the shallow and deep burial stations designated for allocation
of equipment, communication and control facilities the water diversion umbrellas or metal
insulation over these premises depending on their location should be provided.
Removal of water from the umbrellas and space between the premises walls and decorative
lining structures to the common water drainage network should be provided.
Openings providing the natural ventilation of the space between the lining and umbrella
should be arranged in the umbrellas.
5.3.9. The polished plate flooring in the passenger premises, and faceted plate flooring
made from rocks and artificial materials at the stair platforms and staircases, as well as in the
under-street pedestrian crossings should be provided.
The surface of stairs and platforms of the staircases should have coarse structure
preventing the sliding.
The materials applied for the passenger premises flooring should have compressive
resistance no less than 60 МPа, and abrasive resistance no more than 0,5 g/cm2 according to
the GOST 9479.
The floors should have the slope toward the trough gutters.
5.3.10. Flooring of the platform section of 60 cm width from the edge should be made
from granite forged with small bush hammer. At the distance of 60 cm from the platform edge
10 cm width band made from contrast material, and at the distance of 120 cm – coarse surface
beveled granite band, 5mm extruding from the floor surface to provide orientation on the
platformе for cecutient and sightless passengers should be laid.
5.3.11. Staircases for the passenger moving should have 1:3 slope; in separate cases the
slope can be increased, but should be no more than 1:2,6.
For the staircases of passages from middle hall to interchange corridor over the tracks, and
in other substantiated cases the 1:2 slope is allowed.
The stair tread width should be no less than 30 cm, and no more than 36 cm.
The number of stairs in one flight of stairs or in the level difference sections should be no
less than 3, and no more than 18.
Staircases in the passenger walkways should be equipped with handrails.
5.3.12. The station vestibules can be of above-ground or underground type, in
correspondence with the urban planning, architectural-spatial and climatic conditions.
It is recommended to place the staircases in under-street pedestrian crossings adjacent to
the underground vestibules in pavilions.
At the entrance to vestibules the portals having two door lines and at the entrance to
pavilions the portals having one door line should be provided.
5.3.13. On the both sides of street in one of staircases to pedestrian crossing the 1m width
area for moving of passengers with bassinettes should be provided.
5.3.14. In the under-street pedestrian crossings with open staircases the vestibule adjacent
section should be separated with partition walls having one door line.
5.3.15. In front of the entrance (exit) to above-ground, or staircase to underground
vestibule the heated site at the height of 12 - 15 cm from the maximal mark of vertical
Page 22 of 295

planning of pavement should be provided. At the places supposed to be flooded during the
rainfalls or waterway failures the height of site should be defined by calculation. The ramp for
wheelchairs should be provided between the site and pavement.
5.3.16. Near the vestibules the shaft to move rasping and inert material to the level of
under-street pedestrian crossing, and near the vestibules with escalators the site for temporary
storage of escalator blocks with possibility of motor transport approach should be provided.
5.3.17. The pits for collection of water and dirt should be provided:
а) in the under-street pedestrian crossings – near the bottom stair of the staircase;
b) in the above-ground vestibule – in a warm area;
c) at the shallow station platform - near the bottom stair of the staircases from the ticket
hall of vestibule. The following minimum width of grids should be accepted: for а) - 1,0 m, b)
- 3,0 m, c) - 0,5 m.
The grids should be installed by the whole width of staircases.
The width of the grid openings should be no more than 15 mm.
5.3.18. The following items should be located in the ticket hall of vestibule:
- Automated Check-points at the entrances and exits;
- Controller booth equipped with automated check-point operation control devices,
communication facilities, public address system and electrical heating;
- Barriers near the escalators and staircases for direction of passenger flows;
- Coin changers;
- Traffic documents sale machines;
- Escalators control panel near the escalator located on the side of entrance to machine
room;
- Cabinets with fire cocks and outside taps;
- Underground Railroad lines scheme, Underground Railroad use regulations, telephones
of Underground Railroad referral service and communication with the station dispatcher
point;
- Elements of passengers visual information;
- Clocks, loud-speakers, telecameras.
The following items should be located at the level of the station platform:
- Escalators duty officer booth equipped with escalator stop console, tele-monitoring
screens, communication facilities, public address system and electrical heating;
- Booth of the duty officer controlling the arrival and departure of trains at the end stations
and stations having the tracks to the Electric depot, equipped with communication facilities
and electrical heating;
- Barriers near the escalators and staircases for the direction of the passenger flows;
- Elements of passengers visual information;
- Telecameras, loud-speakers, ОТС telephones;
- Cabinets for inventory fire extinguishers;
- Cabinets with fire cocks and outside taps;
- Escalators control panel in the wall niche located on the side of entrance to tension
chamber;
- Rear-view mirrors or monitors near the head train control cabin;
- Connecting facilities for each track in the platform ends;
- Explosion-proof chambers;
- Barriers near the main line tunnel entrance doors;
- Litter-baskets;
- Rest benches.
5.3.19. Service bridge to the tunnel should have the passage width no less than 0,75 m at
the distance of 1,5 m from the floor level, and 2,1 m height cage along the whole length with
removal elements at the place of entrance to production premises block corridor.
Page 23 of 295

The bridge door should be opened toward the platform.
The 2nd type staircase made from inflammable materials with 1,2 m height barrier should
be provided for descent from the bridge or station platform to the tunnel. The width of
staircases near the entrance to the bridge or platform should be no less than 0,7 m, the slope –
no more than 1:1, width of tread – no less than 25 cm, height of stairs – no more than 22 cm.
5.3.20. The rest benches located at the platform should not obstruct the passengers moving.
The benches at the deep burial stations should be located, as a rule, in the opening-free parts
of platform. At the single-vault stations it is recommended to locate the benches on the
platform axis in every 25 - 30 m, and to combine them with structures for installation of
elements of visual passengers’ information and loud-speakers.
5.3.21. Places for storage and charging of floor cleaning machines, hoisting equipment,
ladders and rigs at the level of ticket halls and platforms should be provided outside the
passenger premises.
5.3.22. Decoration of premises with continuous residence of personnel should be provided
in accordance with the SNiP 2.09.04 and SNiP 32-02.
The sound-absorbing materials should be applied for decoration of ceilings and walls of
radio centers, station dispatcher points, medical centers, escalator drivers, drivers’ change
point, and ticket block premises.
The durability of the premises elements erected from light materials should provide
opportunity of fixing of technological communications (ventilation boxes, cables, pipes,
sewerage facilities, etc) to them.
Decoration of premises should be provided taking into consideration of requirements of
technical aesthetics and hygiene.
5.3.23. The floors in the production premises and corridors should be made from
inflammable and non-toxic materials having the high level of abrasive resistance and low
level of water absorption (such as ceramic, poured, and other materials).
The floors in the premises with continuous residence of personnel should be executed in
correspondence with the clause 5.16.12 of the SNiP 32-02.
The level of floor in the premises with train traffic control and communication devices
should be 5 - 10 mm higher than the level of floor in corridor (passage).
The floors in all premises should sustain the load no less than 5 KN/m2, in the production
premises the load from equipment installed in these premises should be taken into account.
5.3.24. The doors in all premises should be single-type, having the minimum width of
0,8m, and minimum height of 2,0 m, and should be opened, as a rule, toward the exit from the
premises. For A and B categories of premises, as well as for the premises with simultaneous
presence of more than 5 persons the doors obligatory should be opened toward the exit from
the premises. Dimensions of the doors in the production premises should be defined on the
base of conditions of transportation of equipment located in these premises. In case of
substantiation it is allowed to accept the doors height to be equal to 1,8 m. The underground
premises of C3 and higher categories should have the fire-proof doors.
The premises doors opened on the way of passengers’ evacuation should not obstruct the
evacuation flow.
The doors of premises should be equipped with locks and self-door-closing devices.
The door to the ticket block should be metal, with two locks, chain and door viewer. The
door to the ticket block should be additionally guarded from inside by metal grid door.
The doors on the all passenger walkways should be double-action doors, transparent, made
from impact-resistant material, with the height no less than 2,2 m, and the width no less than
0,8 m. The under-part of the doors should be guarded by anti-shock band having the width of
0,3 m; the contrast marking should be inserted on the transparent door surface, the under-part
of which should be located at the distance of 1,5 m from the floor.
The doors of vestibules leading outside should have facilities for their fixation in the open
Page 24 of 295

position. In case the portal should be arranged the distance between the door lines should be
no less than 2,5 m.
5.3.25. In the premises with continuous residence of the personnel and in the production
premises of the train traffic control and communication the laying of transit technological
communications (ventilation boxes, pipes, and cables) is not allowed.
5.3.26. The station and approaches to them should be equipped with passengers informing
system with visual static and operative changing information.
In the passengers visual information system the light and color indicators and symbols, as
well as display screens with changing information should be provided.
The light indicators should be located in the direction of passenger flows:
- In front of the entrance (exit) to the underground vestibule from the pedestrian crossing;
- Up and down in front of the escalator (staircase) from the ticket hall of the vestibule to
the station platform and to the interchange building;
- At the station platform in the middle hall and in the passages between the piers (columns)
of the deep burial stations.
At the track wall of the platform part of the station no less than two line route schemes
with indication of interchange with the other line stations should be located.
At the portals of the staircases to the pedestrian crossings adjacent to the underground
vestibules of stations, at the pavilions over the staircases, and at the above ground vestibules
the luminous symbols - «М» character and the text of the station name should be installed.
5.3.27. At the stations, in the interchange corridors, in the pedestrian crossings, and at the
pavilions over the staircases the places for advertisement should be provided; the mentioned
advertisement should correspond to the clause 5.16.1.3, and should not be located near the
elements of the passengers’ visual information.
5.3.28. For transportation of large-scale equipment of escalators from the machine room to
the ground surface or to the line track, the passes and shaft with carrying and lifting facilities
having the lifting capacity no less than the weight of the escalator shaft, and site for
maintenance of these facilities should be provided.
In case the shaft exit to the ground surface is located at the place convenient for the motor
transport approach and for execution of lifting works it is allowed to deliver the equipment
through the shaft using the crane. The structure of the exit should be dismountable and should
be equipped with waterproofing.
For transportation of equipment through the vestibule or middle hall of the station the
removable plates, and for small equipment the hatch having dimensions no less than 1,5×2,0
m should be provided in the machine room flooring.
5.3.29. The bypass cable tunnels at the places of connection to the near-station facilities
and main line tunnels should have the fire-proof partitions and doors according to the clause
5.16 of the SNiP 32-02.
In the bypass cable tunnels no less than one partition should be provided; the length of the
compartment separated by the partition should be no more than 120 m.
5.3.30. The composition of the underground vestibules of the stations and pedestrian
crossings according the separate assignment can include additional sites and premises for
placement of objects of commercial and social-and-domestic designation with observance of
requirements indicated in the clause 5.16.
5.4. Main line and connecting tunnels, near-tunnel facilities
5.4.1. Depending on the depth of bedding, engineering-and-geological conditions, type of
accepted structures of the lining and methods of construction the tunnels can be single-line or
double-line, circular, horseshoe-shaped or square.
5.4.2. It is recommended to construct the single-line or double-line square tunnels by the
cut-and-cover method of works, and single-line circular tunnels by the closed method of
works. In the stable grounds it is possible to apply the horseshoe-shaped tunnels.
Page 25 of 295

The double-line tunnels should have dividing partitions between the tracks.
5.4.3. In case the tunnels floor is situated over the depth of freezing in winter period their
heat-insulation should be provided with protection from wetting and mechanical failures. At
the near-portal section where the internal air temperature in the coldest month will be below
0°С, it is allowed not to provide the heat-insulation.
The insulation material and thickness should be accepted by calculation.
The tunnels portals coming out to the ground surface should be equipped with air curtain
or warm air curtain (see the clause 5.8.1.2.19).
5.4.4. The insulation joints should be provided in the tunnel linings. Distance between
these joints in the linings made from cast-in-situ concrete should not exceed 30 m, for linings
made from cast-in-situ reinforced concrete - 40 m, for linings made from pre-fabricated
elements with cast-in-situ joints - 60 m.
5.4.5. In the tunnels the service bridges should be provided in front of adjacency of neartunnel facilities to them.
5.4.6. The internal surface of the tunnel linings should be coated with light color waterproof inflammable compositions.
5.4.7. In the tunnels the signal signs should be placed according to the Instructions [8] and
Regulations [9].
5.4.8. The lining connection nodes of the near-tunnel facilities and tunnels with cast-iron
segmental lining should be made, as a rule, using the metal waterproofing having the
thickness no less than 10 mm.
5.4.9. The near-tunnel facilities (ventilating, water-removing, water-intake, sewerage
installations, evacuation exits to the ground surface, other production designation facilities)
should be located, where possible, between the main line tunnels. The spatial-planning
solutions of the near-tunnel structures should be defined according to their technological
designation and fire protection requirements.
5.4.10. The structure of the doors leading to the near-tunnel facilities, their locking and
fixing mechanisms should be resistant to the effect of long-term alternating-sign wind loads
on them, and should have seals in the ledges. Where possible, the doors should be opened
toward the inside.
5.5. Urban infrastructure objects
5.5.1. Designing of the urban infrastructure objects adjacent to the stations, main line
tunnels and other Underground Railroad facilities should be executed in correspondence with
requirements included in the design assignments for the Underground Railroad line.
In the assignment information about the customer, designation, location, approximate
amount and sources of financing of the construction of above ground and underground objects
of the urban infrastructure should be reflected, list of applied standards should be represented,
additional requirements not included in the regulatory documents should be reflected.
5.5.2. It is recommended to design and construct the enclosing structures of the urban
infrastructure objects and adjacent to them Underground Railroad facilities simultaneously,
and the internal structures and engineering equipment – in correspondence with stipulated
periods of their putting into operation.
5.5.3. The possibility of utilization of the engineering provision systems of the
Underground Railroad for the urban infrastructure objects should be defined individually, and
reflected in the design assignments.
5.6. Construction structures
5.6.1. Enclosing structures
5.6.1.1. The bearing enclosing structures of the underground facilities (linings) should be
provided on the base of accepted spatial-and-planning solutions and the depth of the facility
bedding, engineering-and-geological, climatic and seismic conditions, construction-andmounting works execution technology, communication with near-tunnel and near-station
Page 26 of 295

facilities of urban infrastructure, requirements of the clause 5.16.
The lining types should be accepted on the base of comparison of their different variants.
Herewith the mutual action between the lining and surrounding ground should be taken into
consideration, and the measures excluding the negative effect of the construction on the
buildings, communications, and other facilities of urban infrastructure should be taken.
5.6.1.2. The internal bearing structures of the stations and other underground facilities
should be made, as a rule, from pre-fabricated reinforced concrete elements or cast-in-situ
reinforced concrete. The metal structures application area should be limited to arrangement of
the station columns and lintels over the passages, runs, ties and their connecting elements,
connections of different diameter linings, and water-proofing of the most critical structural
components.
5.6.1.3. The pre-fabricated reinforced concrete elements of the enclosing and internal
structures of the underground facilities should meet the requirements of TU (Technical
Conditions) 5865-001-00043920.
5.6.1.4. The water drainage to the tunnel through the enclosing structures is not allowed.
5.6.2. Materials
5.6.2.1. Materials for linings and their water-proofing, for internal construction structures,
as well as decoration materials should meet the requirements of hardness, durability, fire
safety, resistance to the chemical aggressiveness of the ground waters, other kinds of
aggressive environmental effect, including the microorganisms action; they should not emit
toxic compounds in the conditions of construction and operation of the facilities, correspond
to the requirements of GOSTS or Technical Conditions.
5.6.2.2. The concrete and reinforced concrete bearing structures should be made from
heavy concretes according to the GOST 26633. In case of corresponding substantiation it is
allowed to apply concretes having the density no less than 1600 kg/m3 with artificial or
natural porous fillers.
5.6.2.3. Class of the concrete on the compressive resistance for linings, their elements, and
internal concrete and reinforced concrete structures should be accepted no less than indicated
in the Table 5.6.1.
T a b l e 5.6.1
Kind of structure
Concrete class
High precision reinforced concrete blocks of linings made from the water-proof concrete for
В40
closed method of works, preliminary stressed reinforced concrete elements of structures
Standard reinforced concrete blocks of linings for closed method of works
В30
Reinforced concrete elements of linings for cut-and-cover method of works (including the
В25
integral-section ones), bearing structures of «walls in ground» and internal structures
Reinforced concrete and concrete cast in-situ bearing «walls in ground» and linings, concrete
В20
cast-in-situ pressed linings
«Walls in ground» for shoring of trenches, internal cast-in-situ reinforced concrete structures,
В15
concrete workpieces under the water-proofing
Track concrete layer of the rack bed structures
В15
Rigid foundation of the track, concrete foundation under the floors, concrete for water
В7,5
removing and cable trays

5.6.2.4. Concrete for linings provided with water-proofing along the whole their contour
should have the design mark on the water-proofing no less than W6 according to the GOST
12730.5.
5.6.2.5. The concrete linings and internal structures design marks on the freeze resistance
in the areas of alternating-sign temperatures should correspond to the SNiP 52-01 applicably to
the 1 class structures on their significance level.
In case of absence of alternating-sign temperatures the concrete design marks on the freeze
resistance should not be less than F100.
5.6.2.6. The cast iron strength characteristics of assembled (liner plates) linings made from
grey cast iron should correspond to the GOST 1412, made from high-strength cast iron – to the
Page 27 of 295

GOST 7293.

5.6.2.7. For reinforcement of the reinforced concrete structures the hot-rolled and thermostrengthened steel of the А240 - А500 classes the strength and deformation characteristics of
which are represented in the SNiP 52-01, as well as the ones of the А500С class according to
the letter [12] should be used.
The design and calculated resistances of the rolled iron for steel structures and iron
castings from the grey cast iron of different marks should be accepted according to the SNiP II23.
5.6.2.8. For the water-proofing linings the materials should be accepted according to the
5.6.3.3.
5.6.3. Linings, water-proofing and anticorrosion protection
5.6.3.1. Structure of linings for the closed method of works
5.6.3.1.1. At the closed method of works the linings should be circular or arch-shaped. In
case of presence of side pressure, deep seat or hydrostatic pressure the shapes of walls and
vaults should be defined by means of calculations.
The cavities behind the lining should be filled with hardening compositions in
correspondence with VSN (All-Russia Construction Standards) 132, or should provide forced
clamping of mounted rings of linings to the ground.
5.6.3.1.2. The elements of pre-fabricated linings should have folds by the internal contour
forming embossed grooves in the assembled lining. In case of tightening of the joints using
rubber insulating strips or using strips made from other materials the gutters should be
provided on the side surfaces of elements.
5.6.3.1.3. The arrangement of single-layer linings made from the shotcreting is allowed in
the low water-flooded rocky grounds in combination with grid reinforcement, anchors, metal
arches, or under the conditions of reinforcement with shotcreting fibers.
5.6.3.1.4. Elements of the concrete and reinforced concrete linings should have the
thickness no less than, mm:
а) Solid section reinforced concrete blocks - 150;
b) Ribs and backs of the ribbed reinforced concrete blocks - 80;
c) Vaults and walls from the cast-in-situ concrete and reinforced concrete - 200;
d) Vaults and walls from the shotcreting - 100.
5.6.3.1.5. At the part-by-part working of openings in the rocky grounds it is possible to
apply linings in the form of variable rigidity vault (with vault abutments) made from cast-insitu concrete, reclined simultaneously against the cavity concrete block walls and ground.
5.6.3.1.6. For the facilities operating in the conditions of hydrostatic pressure more than
0,3 МPа or alternating-sign temperatures, the cast-in-situ and precast steel-concrete linings
can be applied in the form of metal insulation blocks with reinforcing cages, embedded in
concrete after their mounting.
5.6.3.1.7. At the construction of tunnels by means of punching the circular linings made
from the cast iron liner plates, or square linings in the form of integral sections (rigid frame
structures) made from the pre-fabricated reinforced concrete should be applied.
The plant-manufactured reinforced concrete sections should have the maximum length,
defined by capabilities of transport and hoisting equipment. The sections manufactured
directly at the construction site can have the length up to 20 - 30 m and more.
For integration of solid sections in the longitudinal direction the welding of free lengths of
reinforcement bars, bolting connections of embedded parts in the gutters by the ends of
sections, or connection and crimping by pre-stressed longitudinal reinforcement should be
used.
5.6.3.2. Structures of linings for the cut-and-cover method of works
5.6.3.2.1. The linings of tunnels at the cut-and-cover method of works should be provided
in the form of single-, double-, three-, or multi-span closed frames, or in the form of arched
Page 28 of 295

structures made from pre-fabricated, cast-in-situ, or cast-in-situ and precast reinforced
concrete. Preferably it is recommended to apply square linings.
5.6.3.2.2. The standard linings consisting from the flooring blocks, wall, foundation, and
trough blocks, kneeboards, columns and runs should be used as pre-fabricated structures
constructed in the open pit. Modification of the standard structures should be executed by the
way of changes in configuration, dimensions, and types of separate blocks.
Integration of the pre-fabricated elements in the frame structure should be executed by
means of welding of free lengths of reinforcement bars or embedded parts, embedded in
concrete gaps, grouting or calking of joints with the cement grout.
In case the floor spans have the length more than 12 m it is advisably to apply pre-stressed
reinforced concrete t-section or box-like section beams.
5.6.3.2.3. In case of loosed ground foundation (pulverescent and fine water-bearing sands,
loosed argillic grounds) the lining of tunnels should be fulfilled with preliminary arrangement
of distributing reinforced concrete plate having the thickness no less than 30 cm, in the
grounds conditions do not require execution of special kinds of works preventing the structure
settlement.
5.6.3.2.4. In case of availability of correspondent production base the frame structures of
the main line tunnel linings can be applied in the form of solid sections. At the stream
crossing it is possible to apply lining made from immersible sections.
5.6.3.2.5. The construction of structures by means of application of trench walls in ground
technology should be executed in accordance with STP 014.
5.6.3.2.6. In the bearing structures of the stations the isolation joints should be provided the
distance between which should be no more than 60 m. At the places of change of the structure
type, ground type in the foundation, or abrupt change of loads on lining the additional
isolation joints should be provided. The details of architectural decoration of the stations
should also have joints along the line of isolation joint structures.
5.6.3.2.7. At the construction of tunnel structures in seismic regions the distance between
the isolation joints should be defined by means of calculations.
5.6.3.3. Water-proof linings and anti-corrosion protection
5.6.3.3.1. The necessity of arrangement of the water-proofing and its type for different
kinds of lining is defined by the engineering-and-geological conditions of the construction,
value of the hydrostatic pressure, presence of aggressive environmental effect, type of linings,
possibility of providing of the concrete water impermeability at the accepted technology of
the construction works execution, and other operating conditions.
5.6.3.3.2. The structures of tunnels constructed in the water-bearing grounds by the cutand-cover method should have solid external water-proofing along the whole contour.
In case there is natural water drain under the tunnel, the wall drainage should be applied as
additional water-proof protection. In case the foundation grounds have insufficient filtration
ability the layer drainage should be provided under the buckle plate part of the tunnel.
5.6.3.3.3. Welded and glued water-proofing from bitumen-polymeric and from membrane
type polymeric materials (on the polyvinyl chloride, high and low pressure polyethylene
support, etc) at the cut-and-cover method of works from roll materials corresponding to the
Table 5.6.2 and GOST 30547 should be provided.
T a b l e 5.6.2
Parameter name
Conditional strength, МPа, no less than
Breaking load under tension, N, no less than
Water absorption during an 24 hours, mass.%, no more than
Water-proofing at the hydrostatic pressure, МPа, no less than
Ductile-to-brittle transition temperature, °С, no more than

Indices for materials
Bitumen-polymeric (on the
polymeric
polymeric support)
(without support)
No standard
10,0
600
No standard
1,0
1,0
0,2
0,3
Minus 25
Minus 50
Page 29 of 295

Indices for materials
Bitumen-polymeric (on the
polymeric
polymeric support)
(without support)
Flexibility of bar with rounded radius of 10,0 ± 0,2 mm, no more
Minus 15
Minus 40
than
Heat distortion temperature, °С during 2 hours, no less than
85
85
Elongation at fracture, %, no less than
30
200
Adhesiveness to concrete, МPа, no less than
0,5
Chemical resistance (reduction of the conditional strength and
10
10
elongation, or breaking load under the effect of salts, acids,
alkalis, petrol, mineral oils, etc), %, no more than
N o t e – Index of the chemical resistance is given for water-proofing tunnel structures subjected to the effect
of aggressive media.
Parameter name

5.6.3.3.4. In the buckle part the water-proofing should be laid to the concrete mattress
(concrete class no less than В15) having the thickness no less than 10 cm with blinding using
compo.
At the places of isolation joints the compensators should be provided for the external
water-proofing, and sealing splines should be applied as additional guarantee of the waterproofing of linings.
At the arranging of water-proofing preliminary inserted on the surface elements of prefabricated linings the reliable methods of connection of separate elements of the waterproofing during the process of their mounting, and methods of its prevention from damages
during the construction process should be provided.
5.6.3.3.5. Welded and glued water-proofing should be reliably protected from possible
mechanical damages. Protection of water-proofing should be provided taking into
consideration the operating conditions of the underground structure, its structural specifics,
construction works execution technology, and type of the applied water-proofing material.
Protective coatings for the buckle part and flooring of the structure should be made from
combo or fine concrete of no less than В25 class, and should have thickness of 4 - 10 cm. The
protective coating of the flooring should be reinforced by reinforcing steel nets with
100×100mm or 150×150 mm meshes.
The water-proofing of the structure walls should be protected by under-reinforced concrete
plates (В15), net shotcreting, polymeric membranes (such as «Hydroplast» profile sheets
according to the TU 2246-049-00203387), or by other effective and reliable materials.
5.6.3.3.6. It is allowed to execute the water-proofing of «walls in ground» using as bearing
structures in watered grounds by metal sheets having the thickness no less than 10 mm.
5.6.3.3.7. At the construction of tunnels by closed method according the NATM (New
Austrian Tunneling Method) technology the pre-fabricated water-proofing should be put
between the temporary external shotcreting and internal reinforced concrete bearing structure
of the tunnel.
5.6.3.3.8. The water-proofing arranged, where appropriate, inside the linings should be
protected by reinforced concrete casing designed for perception of expected hydrostatic
pressure. In this case the firm forcing of the internal reinforced concrete structure to the
water-proofing should be provided.
5.6.3.3.9. In the pre-fabricated reinforced concrete and cast iron linings of the shield-driven
tunnels the sealing of joints between the lining elements, bolt holes (in case of cast-iron
lining), and injection holes using the resilient seals or by means of calking should be
provided.
5.6.3.3.10. The anti-corrosion protection of the steel structures should be executed in
correspondence with the SNiP 2.03.11 and SNiP 3.04.03. In this case preparation of the metal
surface should be executed according to the chapter 2 of the SNiP 3.04.03 and should conform
to the 1st degree of treatment on the degreasing and 2nd degree of treatment from oxides
according the GOST 9.402. The rounded radius of sharp edges should be no less than 2 mm.
Page 30 of 295

For padding should be applied, as a rule, zinc additive epoxy or polyurethane varnish-andpaint materials, and other modern materials meeting the corresponding requirements. The
polyurethane, rubber, epoxy, and other varnish-and-paint materials should be applied as
coating materials.
5.6.3.3.11. In case of application of steel structures or rolled metal products with their
subsequent embedding in concrete or filling with concrete the preparation of their surfaces
should be the same as for the anti-corrosion protection, and concrete works should be
executed according to the specially elaborated order.
The external metal insulation in addition to its protection by anti-corrosion composition
should be coated with gunite covering.
5.6.4. Loads and effects
5.6.4.1. Types of loads and effects
5.6.4.1.1. The loads and effects by the period of their action on the tunnel linings according
to the SNiP 2.01.07 should be divided to continuous and temporary (long-term, short-term, and
specific) loads and effects.
5.6.4.1.2. The following should be related to the continuous loads:
- filled ground weight, strata pressure;
- Hydrostatic pressure;
- Own weight of structures;
- Weight of the buildings and structures located in the area of their effect on the
underground structure;
- Persisting pre-stressing forces of linings and pressure of shield jacks.
5.6.4.1.3. The following should be related to the long-term loads:
- The ground frost boil forces;
- Weight of the stationary equipment;
- Seasonal temperature effects, effects of settlement and creep of concrete, and some others
according to the SNiP 2.01.07;
- Linings pre-stressing forces.
The following should be related to the short-term loads:
- Loads and effects of intra-tunnel and above-ground transport;
- Loads and effects acting during the tunnel construction process: from the shield jacks
pressure, from the injection of the matrix under lining, from the forces emerging at the
conveyance and mounting of elements of pre-fabricated structures, from the action of weight
of excavating and other construction equipment, and some other loads defined by the specifics
of execution of works.
5.6.4.1.4. The seismic and explosion effects, temperature effects, effects from shear
deformation of the ground mass, and some other unordinary loads according the SNiP 2.01.07
that can be connected with the designed object should be related to specific effects and loads.
5.6.4.2. Continuous loads
5.6.4.2.1. At the calculations of the tunnel linings it is allowed to accept the vertical and
horizontal loads from the weight of the filled ground at the cut-and-cover method of works,
from the ground pressure at the closed method of works, or from other continuous loads
acting within the whole span or the whole height of the structure or opening as the uniformly
distributed loads.
5.6.4.2.2. For the objects constructed by the cut-and-cover method the value of design
vertical load from the filled ground should be accepted in correspondence with pressure of all
its mass over the structure, taking into consideration the weight of the above-ground buildings
and other structures supposed to be constructed over the given object or within the wedge of
the ground failure.
5.6.4.2.3. The design vertical and horizontal loads on the lining of tunnels constructed by
the closed method should be defined by the results of the engineering-and-geological
Page 31 of 295

researches taking into account the possibility of forming of the self-supporting arch in the
grounds (Figure 1).

Figure 1. – Scheme for calculation of the height of wedge of failure
5.6.4.2.4. In the unstable grounds where formation of arch is impossible (water-saturated
loose and argillic loose grounds) the load should be accepted taking into consideration the
whole ground mass pressure over the tunnel structure. In such cases the design vertical and
horizontal load qн and рн, KN/m2, should be defined by the formulas:
n

q н = ∑ Yi H i ;
i =1
n

p н = ∑ Yi H i tg 2 (45° − ϕ / 2),
i =1

where Yi is the standard density of the ground of corresponding stratification layer, KN/m3;
Нi is the thickness of the corresponding stratification layer, m;
п is the number of stratification layers;
ϕ is the standard angle of internal friction of the ground at the tunnel cross-section level,
degree.
The same loads should be accepted in case of arch formation if the distance from the top of
the wedge of failure to the ground surface or to the contact with unstable grounds is less than
the height of the wedge of failure.
5.6.4.2.5. The standard uniformly distributed loads: vertical - qн and horizontal рн, KN/m2,
in the conditions of arch formation for homogeneous ground mass should be defined by the
formulas:
q н = γhi ;

p н = γ (h1 + 0,5h )tg 2 (45° − ϕ / 2),
where h1 is the height of the wedge of failure over the top point of the lining, m (Figure 1)
defined according to the clauses 5.6.4.2.6 and 5.6.4.2.7;
γ is the standard density of the ground, KN/m3;
h is the height of opening, m;
ϕ is the standard angle of internal friction of the ground at the tunnel cross-section level,
degree.
5.6.4.2.6. The height of the wedge of failure А over the top point of the lining in the
conditions of the arch formation (figure 1) for soft dewatered grounds should be defined by
the formula:
L
h1 =
,
2f
where L is the span value of the wedge of failure defined by the formula:
L = b + 2htg (45° - ϕ/2);
Page 32 of 295

f is coefficient characterizing the stability of the groundа in the opening according the
Table 5.6.3;
b is the span value of the opening, m.
T a b l e 5.6.3
Type of the ground of the opening cross-section and roof
Hard lithified clays (foliaceous, argillaceous, marly, etc)
Hard consistence clays, overconsolidated like the upper carboniferous or proterozoic ones
Coarsely clastic grounds with clay sand and sandy filler, thick, clays and hard consistence
argillo-arenaceous grounds
Thick low-watered sands or clay sand and argillic-arenaceous grounds
Half-hard consistence clays and argillic-arenaceous grounds

Coefficient f
1,0
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6

Height of the wedge of failure h1 over the top point of the lining for the tunnels constructed
in the argillic grounds at the depth more than 45 m should be accepted using the coefficient К
= Н / 45, where Н is the depth of the tunnel bedding from the ground surface to the bottom of
the tunnel lining, m.
In case the tunnels are bedded in argillic grounds the hardness of which decreases under
the effect of inflowing underground waters the height of the wedge of failure h1 should be
increased in the range up to 30 %.
N o t e – For the three-vault stations the total width of the station openings should be accepted as the span
value of the opening «b».

5.6.4.2.7. The height of the wedge of failure h1 over the top point of the lining in the
conditions of the arch formation for rocky grounds should be defined by the formulas:
а) for rocky grounds exerting the vertical and horizontal pressure,
L
h1 =
,
0,2 Rα
б) for rocky grounds exerting the vertical pressure only,
b
h1 =
,
0,2 Rα
where R is the ultimate compression strength of the ground «in a piece» (sample), МPа;
α is the coefficient considering the effect of the mass fissuring accepted by the Table 5.6.4
on the base of ultimate compression strength of the ground «in a piece» and category of the
mass by the fissuring degree defining depending on the fissure cavitations and the density of
fissures (average distance between the fissures in the most developed fissure system) by the
Table 5.6.5 , and additional characteristics of the fissuring according to the CN (Construction
Standards) 484.
T a b l e 5.6.4
Category of the rocky ground mass by the
fissuring degree
I – practically without fissuring
II – low- fissuring
III – average fissuring
IV – heavy fissuring
V - splitted (divisible rock)
Т а б л и ц а 5.6.5
Fissuring cavitation, %
Small – less than 0,3
Average - 0,3 - 1,0
Big - 1,0 - 3,0
Very big – more than 3,0
Notes:

Coefficient α at the ultimate compression strength of the ground
«in a piece», МPа
10
20
40
80
160
1,7
1,4
1,2
1,1
1,0
1,4
1,2
1,0
0,9
0,8
1,2
0,9
0,7
0,6
0,5
0,9
0,7
0,5
0,4
0,3
0,7
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1
Category of grounds at the fissures density, m
Very low
Very heavy
Low density
Heavy density
density (more
density (less
(1,0 - 0,3)
(0,3 - 0,1)
than 1,0)
than 0,1)
I
II
III
IV
II
III
IV
V
III
IV
V
V
IV
V
V
V

Page 33 of 295

Category of grounds at the fissures density, m
Very low
Very heavy
Fissuring cavitation, %
Low density
Heavy density
density (more
density (less
(1,0 - 0,3)
(0,3 - 0,1)
than 1,0)
than 0,1)
1. At the definition of the fissuring cavitation the loose and argillaceous material of the fissures filling should
not be taken into consideration.
2. At the big and very big fissuring cavitation with simultaneous well-defined division of the mass to the
blocks by their fissuring degree it should be related to the V category (splitted) regardless of the fissures density.
3. In the conditions of expected total discontinuity of the rocky grounds in the result of their intensive
stratification (cleavage) the grounds should be related to the category V.
4. In case of presence of the running surfaces the category of the ground by the fissuring degree should be
increased on one level.
5. At the fissures partially healed with hard (crystal) material the category of the ground by the fissuring
degree should be decreased on one level, and at the totally healed fissures they should be accepted by the I
category.

Availability of the horizontal pressure of the rocky ground should be defined according the
experience of construction in analogous conditions. In case of lack of analogues the
calculation of linings should be executed in two versions: with the horizontal pressure and
without it.
5.6.4.2.8. The height of the wedge of failure for rocky grounds obtained by the formulas
5.6.4.2.7 should be corrected by its multiplying coefficients considering the effect of the
following factors:
а) Water inflow in the opening for the cases where the fissures are filled with loose or
soaking argillaceous material, - 1,2;
b) Location of the fissures in the most developed their system under the angle to the tunnel
axis less than 45° - 1,1;
c) Driving of the openings without application of drilling and blasting operations - 0,8.
5.6.4.2.9. In cases when the unfavorable for lining processes (developing of the tectonic
tension, rebound, running grounds, karst-suffusion occurrences) can be developed in the
ground mass, or considerable change of properties and conditions of the grounds resulting
from application of special methods of works is supposed, the load on lining values should be
defined on the base of special researches.
5.6.4.2.10. At the height of the rocky ground wedge of failure less than 1/6 of its span, the
calculation of the underground structures for the action of inrushes should be executed. The
vertical load by the intensity received from the conditions of the arch formation should be
distributed within the area corresponding to 1/4 of the opening span in the most unfavorable
position for the lining work.
5.6.4.2.11. In case of contact with the less hard ground over the tunnel structure within the
wedge of failure, the load on lining from the wedge of failure should be defined by the
parameters of the less hard ground, and in case of availability of the loose grounds not capable
to the arch formation the load on lining from the weight of all superincumbent mass of
grounds should be defined.
If the contact with the more loosed ground is located within the range from one to three
heights of the wedge of failure, the value of the standard vertical load qн, KN/m2, should be
defined by the formula:

(

)

a q1н − q2н
q =q −
,
2h1
н

н
1

н

where q1 is the standard vertical load from the wedge of failure obtained by the parameters of
the less hard ground, or the load from the weight of all mass of grounds over the tunnel
structure (in case of availability of the loose grounds not capable to the arch formation within
the range from one to three heights of the wedge of failure), KN/m2;
q2н is the standard vertical load from the ground containing the tunnel, KN/m2;
Page 34 of 295

a is the distance from the top of the wedge of failure to the contact with the less hard
ground, or with the loose ground not capable to the arch formation, m;
h1 is the height of the wedge of failure of the ground containing the tunnel, m.
5.6.4.2.12. The value of the vertical load from the strata pressure on linings of parallel
closely-located tunnels in case of probability of the arch formation should be defined
depending on the size of opening, sizes and bearing ability of pillars between them, as well as
on the works execution technology:
а) in case of formation of individual wedge of failure over the each opening – for the each
opening separately;
b) in case of formation of total wedge of failure over the openings – to be defined as for the
opening span of which is equal to the sum of spans of all openings and width of pillars
between them.
5.6.4.2.13. The value of the standard load on the tunnel lining in the water-saturated loose
grounds containing the free water should be accepted as the common action of the hydrostatic
pressure of water and pressure of ground in the suspension state. In this case the standard
volume weight of the ground suspended in water γвзв, KN/m3, should be defined by the
formula:
1
(γ s − ∆ ),
γ взв =
1+ ε
where γs is the standard volume weight of the ground defined by the data of laboratory
researches, KN/m3;
∆ is the volume weight of water accepted to be equal to 10 KN/m3;
ε is the value of the ground porosity factor defined by the experimental data.
The value of the hydrostatic pressure should be accepted taking into consideration the
highest level that will be settled after the completion of construction.
5.6.4.2.14. The load from the weight of buildings situated over the tunnel structure should
be accepted depending on the number of floors in the amount of 10 KN/m3 per a floor.
In case the buildings and other above ground structures are located within the ground
wedge of failure the correspondent increasing of the horizontal load should be taken into
consideration.
5.6.4.2.15. The standard horizontal load on the circular linings in argillic grounds of the
fluid and semi-fluid consistency, water-saturated grounds, as well as in the grounds dropping
into the fluid state during the operation conditions should be accepted equal to no more than
0,75 of the value of the standard vertical load defined in correspondence with the weight of
superincumbent ground mass.
5.6.4.2.16. The standard vertical load from the own weight of structures should be defined
on the base of design dimensions of the structures and specific weight of materials.
5.6.4.2.17. The reliability factors for the continuous loads at the calculation of the lining
structures by the loss of sustaining capacity should be accepted by the Table 5.6.6.
T a b l e 5.6.6
Type of the load
Vertical from the ground pressure:
From the weight of the whole ground mass over the tunnel;
From the strata pressure at the arch formation for the grounds:
а) rocky
б) argillic
в) sands and coarsely clastic rocks
From the ground pressure at the inrushes
Horizontal – from the ground pressure
Hydrostatic pressure
Own weight of structure:
Pre-fabricated reinforced concrete
Cast-in-situ concrete and reinforced concrete

Reliability factor
1,1
1,6
1,5
1,4
1,8
1,2 (0,8)
1,1 (0,9)
1,1 (0,9)
1,2 (0,8)
Page 35 of 295

Type of the load
Metal
insulation, leveling, decorative layers
Persisting forces from the pre-stressing linings and pressure of the shield jacks

Reliability factor
1,05
1,3
1,3

The value of the reliability factor indicated in the Table 5.6.6 in brackets should be
accepted only in case when the decrease of the load leads to the more unfavorable load of
linings.
At the calculation of the structures strength and durability for the construction stage the
reliability factors by the continuous loads should be accepted equal to 1.
In the calculations of the linings floating up the value of the stability factor should be
accepted no less than 1,2.
5.6.4.3. Temporary and specific loads and effects
5.6.4.3.1. The standard temporary vertical and horizontal load on linings from the aboveground transport, reliability factors and dynamic factors should be accepted according to the
SNiP 2.05.03.
5.6.4.3.2. The standard temporary vertical load on the track rail (figure 2) from the each
axis of the rolling stock with passengers should be accepted equal to 150 KN.
The standard horizontal shearing load from the centrifugal force and impacts of the rolling
stock, longitudinal load from the deceleration or moving force, as well as reliability factors
and dynamic factors for these loads should be accepted according to the SNiP 2.05.03.
5.6.4.3.3. The temporary standard uniformly distributed load on the stations platforms,
staircases, floorings of the machine rooms of escalators, ticket halls, and other floorings on
which the passengers moving is supposed should be accepted equal to 4 KN/m2 (400 kgf/m2)
with reliability factor of 1,4.
5.6.4.3.4. The temporary load on linings occurring during the construction process should
be defined in correspondence with accepted technology of execution of works taking into
consideration the character of effect on lining from the tunneling, проходческого, conveyingand-lifting, mounting, or other equipment.
The load reliability factor for the temporary load from the shield jacks pressure on lining
should be accepted equal to 1,3.
5.6.4.3.5. Action of the ground frost boil forces on linings in the area of alternating-sign
temperatures should be taken into consideration at the bedding of tunnels in the damp fine and
pulverescent sands, in argillic or coarsely clastic grounds with argillic filler, in the grounds
with consistency index JL > 0 according to the SNiP 2.02.04 depending on the frost boil degree
at the seasonal freezing of the near-contour ground layer under the lining on the depth more
than 0,5 m. The consistency of the argillic grounds should be accepted taking into
consideration the prognosis of its change at the stage of the tunnel operation.

Figure 2. – Scheme of the load on the track rails from the rolling stock
The standard load from the ground frost boil forces qп, МPа emerging at the contact of the
tunnel linings with freezing ground should be defined by the formula:
l


qп = q0 1 +
hm ,
 4F 
Page 36 of 295

where q0 is the uniformly distributed load from the standard frost boil forces, МPа, defined
experimentally and corresponding to the load to be imposed on the surface of the heaving soil
for the total suppression of rebound deformation of the given ground;
l is the perimeter of linings on the external surface, m;
F is the opening cross-section area, m2;
hm is the calculated depth of the seasonal freezing ground layer under the tunnel lining, m.
The reliability factor of load at the definition of the load from the frost boil forces should
be accepted as the load from the strata pressure at the arch formation by the Table 5.6.6.
5.6.4.3.6. The reliability factors of temporary load for the other temporary loads or effects
to be considered at the designing of specific construction structures, depending on the
conditions of execution of works (weight of stationary equipment, load from suspended crane
equipment, effect of the settlement and creep of concrete, and others) should be accepted
according to the SNiP 2.01.07.
5.6.4.3.7. The seismic effect on the tunnel lining for the structures erected in the regions
(zones) having the seismicity of 7 balls and more should be considered by the Manual [16].
5.6.5. Calculation of structures of the underground facilities
5.6.5.1. The analytical models of the structures should maximally correspond to the
structures operating conditions and specifics of interaction of the designed structure elements
with each other and with the ground.
5.6.5.2. Calculation of the underground structure should be conducted in correspondence
with basic provisions of the GOST 27751 taking into consideration unfavorable combinations
of the loads and effects probable for the separate elements or for the whole structure that can
act simultaneously during the construction or operation. In this case it is necessary to consider
the following:
- General combinations of loads consisting from the continuous and temporary (long-term
and short-term) loads and effects;
- Special combinations of loads consisting from the continuous loads, most probable
temporary loads, and one of the specific loads or effects.
The simultaneously acting temporary loads should be considered according to the SNiP
2.01.07.
5.6.5.3. The structures should be calculated by the marginal states of the first and the
second groups.
5.6.5.4. The calculations by the first group marginal states are obligatory for all structures.
They should be fulfilled for general and special combinations of loads using the reliability
factors, load combination coefficients according to the SNiP 2.01.07, coefficients of structure
operating conditions, and calculated values of strength characteristics of their materials, and
where appropriate, dynamic factors.
The tunnel linings should not be checked on their robustness, excluding the big span
linings with minimum covering over the flooring, the calculation of which is conducted by the
bridge diagram.
5.6.5.5. The calculations of structures constructed by the closed method by the first group
marginal states should be executed taking into consideration the specifics of their operation:
а) For the cast-in-situ concrete and cast-in-situ reinforced concrete linings in the dewatered
grounds, or in case of availability of water-proofing the probability of plastification in the
most tense cross-sections should be taken into consideration;
b) For the cast iron and pre-fabricated reinforced concrete linings with pull braces the
location and size of initial gaps in the joints, deformability of joints and probability of
plastification should be taken into consideration.
At the calculation of concrete and reinforced concrete linings the additional coefficient of
the structure operating conditions reflecting the inaccuracy in the analytical model for the
cast-in-situ linings should be accepted equal to 0,9, and for pre-fabricated linings the
Page 37 of 295

deformability of joints should be taken into consideration.
5.6.5.6. Calculation of linings by the second group marginal states should be executed for
the general combination of loads using the reliability factors on the loads and on the structure
operating conditions equal to 1, and for standard values of the strength characteristics of
materials.
At the calculation of linings constructed by the cut-and-cover method of works the
following requirements should be considered:
- For the reinforced concrete elements of the floorings the values of vertical deflections and
crack opening displacement should be defined, in this case the value of deflection from the
action of continuous and temporary vertical loads within the span should not exceed 1/200L
(L is the length of calculated span) at the limiting value of prolonged opening displacement of
the separate cracks up to 0,2 mm;
- For the reinforced concrete elements of walls the values of horizontal deflections and
crack opening displacement should be defined, при этом величина deflection from the action
of continuous and temporary loads for the walls of underground structures should not exceed
1/300Н, for the ramp walls - 1/200Н (Н is the calculated height of the wall) at the limiting
value of prolonged opening displacement of the separate cracks up to 0,3 mm.
The circular outline structures constructed by the closed method should not be checked on
deformability.
N o t e – It is allowed not to execute the calculation of structure by the second group marginal states if the
practice of application of analogous structures or experimental testing of the designed structures suggests that
their hardness is sufficient, and the structures provide normal operation of facilities.

5.6.5.7. The reinforced concrete elements of the pre-fabricated tunnel linings without the
arrangement of solid water-proofing constructed by the closed method in the watered grounds
should be calculated on the load taking into consideration the reliability factors on loads
according the clause 5.6.4.2.17 on the base of conditions of impermissibility of fissuring at the
all stages of work (manufacturing, storage, transportation, mounting, and operation).
In the tunnel linings constructed in the dewatered grounds, as well as in the linings having
the water-proofing along the whole contour the value of crack opening displacement is
allowed to be no more than 0,2 mm.
5.6.5.8. The statistical calculations of linings for all types of tunnels constructed by the cutand-cover and closed method of works on the designed loads can be executed by the
construction mechanical methods (for example, according to the [17]).
Calculations of linings of the tunnels constructed by the closed method should be
conducted taking into consideration the back pressure of the ground mass, except for the
linings designed for the loose grounds (like the running or mud grounds) that can be
calculated without considering of the back pressure.
5.6.5.9. The calculations of the crack resistant cast-in-situ and pre-fabricated round
outlined (circular, elliptical, etc) linings with pull braces in the deep burial tunnels (no less
than three-fold width of opening to the surface ground) in the homogeneous isotropic grounds
can be executed by the mechanical methods for solid media on the base of solution of the
contact problem regarding the interaction between the lining and ground mass. The initial data
at the calculation by these methods are the values of main initial stresses (gravitational or
tectonic) in the virgin ground, deformation characteristics of the lining materials and
surrounding ground, as well as technology of the tunnel construction according to the [18].
5.6.5.10. It is allowed to conduct the pre-calculation of the structures on the base of
assumption of linear work of the structure material and ground mass using the data on the
elastic resistance coefficient.
The deformation characteristics of the ground mass (modulus of deformation, Poisson’s
ration, elastic resistance coefficient) should be defined on the base of data of engineering-andgeological researches, natural and laboratory researches, as well as the data obtained during
the construction of tunnels in the analogous engineering-and-geological conditions. In case of
Page 38 of 295

lack of experimental data it is allowed to accept the elastic resistance coefficient by the Table
5.6.7.
T a b l e 5.6.7
Resistance coefficient, N/cm3 (kgf/cm3)
At the specific pressure on the
ground more than 0,4 МPа (4
kgf/cm2)
Rocky of average hardness (temporary resistance to the single-axis compression in the water-saturated
conditions 25 - 40 МPа (250 - 400 kgf/cm2):
Low fissuring
1000 - 1500 (100 - 150)
1000 - 1500 (100 - 150)
Heavy fissuring
400 - 600 (40 - 60)
400 - 600 (40 - 60)
Rocky of average and low hardness (temporary resistance to the single-axis compression in the water-saturated
conditions 8 - 25 МPа (80 - 250 кгс/см2):
Low fissuring
700 - 1000 (70 - 100)
700 - 1000 (70 - 100)
Heavy fissuring
200 - 400 (20 - 40)
200 - 400 (20 - 40)
Intact hard clays
150 - 250 (15 - 25)
80 - 150 (8 - 15)
Fractured half-hard or hard clays
100 - 200 (10 - 20)
50 - 100 (5 - 10)
Coarsely clastic, tight sands
70 - 100 (7 - 10)
50 - 70 (5 - 7)
Grounds in the opening cross-section

At the specific pressure on the
ground up to 0,4 МPа (4 kgf/cm2)

In the refined calculations the running features and nonlinearity of the structure material
work, and corresponding characteristics obtained by experimental methods for the tunnel
surrounding ground should be used, with application of the method of sequential loading of
the structure up to marginal state.
5.6.5.11. The frictional and adhesive forces between the tunnel lining and ground should be
taken into consideration, except for the cases of bedding of the tunnel in loose grounds. In this
case the values of tangential stress transferred to the ground should not exceed the values of
extreme shearing stresses for the ground.
5.6.5.12. For the pre-fabricated tunnel linings in foundation of which watered fine and
pulverescent sands or hydromorphic binder soils are bedded it is recommended to execute
testing of the circular joints strength taking into consideration the effect of temporary load
from the Underground Railroad train traffic.
The lining in the whole should be calculated as a beam on the elastic foundation under the
load from passing train. At the train speed up to 70 km/h the dynamic factor should be
accepted equal to 1, and at the speed of 70 km/h and more - 1,1.
The testing of the tensile strength of concrete of the buckle part of linings and calking of
joints should be executed taking into consideration cycling of load.
5.6.5.13. At the calculation of linings extruded in the ground in the general combination of
loads at the stage of their mounting the full pre-stressing force and temporary construction
load should be taken into consideration. At the stage of lining operation the effective prestressing force should be taken into consideration in case when it exceeds the normal force of
the strata pressure. Otherwise the calculation should be conducted in the same way as for nonextruded linings.
5.6.5.14. The joints of concrete and reinforced concrete blocks and liner plates should be
calculated on the strength and crack resistance for the most unfavorable distribution of the
contact forces in the joint.
The extreme normal force in the cylindrical joint (bearing capacity of the joint) Nн, МPа,
should be defined by the formula:
 2e 
N н = 0,75 Rб bhэ 1 − ,
 hэ 
where Rб if the calculated axis compression resistance of concrete, МPа;
b is the width of the block or liner plate, m;
hэ is the height of cross-section of the element, m;
е is the possible centering error in the joint (in case of lack of data it is accepted equal to
hэ/30), m.
Page 39 of 295

5.6.5.15. The strength testing of the concrete cross-sections and reinforced concrete linings
should be executed in accordance with the SNiP 52-01.
The strength testing of cross-sections of the cast iron tunnel linings by the marginal states
should be executed according to the SNiP II-23.
5.6.5.16. The ribs of elements of the pre-fabricated linings tightened by bolts should be
calculated on the strength and crack resistance at the critical forces of the bolts. These forces
should be calculated by the standard resistance of the bolt steel with coefficient equal to 1,25.
5.6.5.17. The structures of the column stations constructed by the closed method at the
sequential construction of separate station tunnels should be tested according the analytical
models providing the different phases of stress and strain state of the structure and its separate
parts during the construction process.
The steel columns should be designed taking into consideration the operating conditions
coefficient equal to 0,8, and the centering error in the cross and longitudinal directions of the
station accepted depending on the structure of the heel joints, cm:
а) at the hinge support - 3;
b) at the plate support - 10;
c) at the support through the centering bearings - from 5 to 9 (depending on their
dimensions);
d) at the hinge support with tangential bearing parts - 2.
In case of taking measures preventing displacement of columns during the construction
process and opening of joints between the columns and tubing ends at the plate support, it is
allowed to decrease the centering errors in the cross direction to 5 cm.
5.7. Track and contact rail
5.7.1. Track
5.7.1.1. The parameters of the plan and longitudinal profile of tracks should correspond to
the clause 5.2.
5.7.1.2. The following should be provided as the substructure:
а) for the underground sections – flat foundation made from the reinforced concrete or
cast-in-situ concrete according to the Table 5.6.1;
b) for the ground sections - flat foundation made from the reinforced concrete or road bed
according to the SNiP 32-01 of the I category railroads;
c) for the above-ground sections - reinforced concrete or metal structures of bridges
(including viaducts and overhead roads) according to the SNiP 2.05.03.
5.7.1.3. For the road bed of the above ground section the following should be provided:
- ground compaction in the embankments;
- Protective layer from sands (excluding the fine and pulverescent sands) under the ballast
section according to the Table 5.7.1. The slope grade of the protective layer should be equal to
1:2;
- removal of the surface and ground waters from the road bed;
- strengthening of slopes of the road bed.
T a b l e 5.7.1
Tracks
Main line
Station and connecting

Thickness of the protective layer (sand cushion), m, no less than, for the
road bed grounds
drainage
Non-drainage
0,2
1,1
0,2
0,8

5.7.1.4. As the superstructure the rails, rail fastenings, track switches, scissors crossings,
rail seats, track concrete or ballast layer should be provided.
5.7.1.5. The superstructure should correspond to the Table 5.7.2.
5.7.1.6. The width of the rail gage at the curve track sections should be accepted:
а) for the double-line sections of the main line tracks with the width of inter-track space
less than 6,5 m – equal for the both tracks depending on the curve radius by the working line
Page 40 of 295

of the inter-track space;
b) for other sections of the main line tracks, as well as for station and connecting tracks –
separately for each line, depending on the curve radius by the working line of the track in case
of availability of the easement curve, and depending on the curve radius by the working line
of the track in case of lack of the easement curve.
5.7.1.7. The welding of rails into the continuously welded rails should be executed by
electric contact, aluminothermic or other method approved in the established order.
5.7.1.8. The intermediate rail fastenings should provide:
- electric insulation of rails from the substructure, tunnel linings, track concrete layer,
reinforced concrete rail seat according to the clause 5.21;
- possibility of quick change of rails and regulation of their positions by the height at the
rail seat laid on the track concrete layer.
The fastenings installed on the wooden rail seat with the tie plates and screw track-spikes
should be provided:
T a b l e 5.7.2
Main line tracks
Station tracks
Outside the Within the Outside the Within the Connecting
Parameter
tracks
platform
platform
inspection inspection
station
station
pits
pits
Type of rails
Р50
Р50; Р50(С)
Р50; Р50(С)
Number of the rail seats, pieces, per 1 km of the track:
Cross-ties on the track concrete layer
1680
1680
1680
1840
1840
1840
cross-ties on the ballast layer
1840
1600
1600
2000
1760
1760
Short cross-ties on the track concrete layer
2×1680
2×1680
2×1600
2×1680
2×1840
2×1840
2×1600
2×1840
sills on the track concrete layer
2×400
2×400
2×400
2×400
2×400
2×400
Notes
1. The used rails types are indicated with the С symbol (С).
2. The number of the rail seats is indicated: above the line – for straight and curve sections having the radius
of 1200 m and more, under the line – for the curve sections having the radius less than 1200 m.
3. The type of the rail seat (wood, composition material, reinforced concrete) should be accepted in
correspondence with the approved technical documentation.
4. The sills are located along the track, for each sill no less than four intermediate rail fastenings should be
provided.
5. In case of substantiation it is allowed to apply the rails of heavier types.

а) for the underground sections outside the inspection pits and for the above ground
sections in case of the rail seat laid on the track concrete layer – separate type with elastic or
free fixing of the rail and resilient pads;
b) for the underground sections within the inspection pits – non-separate type;
c) for the above ground sections in case of the rail seat laid on the ballast layer – separate
type on the main line tracks, separate or non-separate type on the station and connecting
tracks;
d) for the ground sections and approaches to them having the length of 200 m by the each
side - separate type with providing of electric insulation of the tie plates from the rail seats,
screw track-spikes, and intermediate wood screw fastenings of the bridge type flange rails.
At the curve underground and above-ground sections of the main line tracks having the
radius of 400 m and less on the wooden rail seat laid on the track concrete layer the
intermediate fastenings with prolonged eight-hole tie plates should partially be applied.
The fastenings for the rail seat of other type should be accepted in correspondence with the
approved technical documentation.
The bolted rail joints should be current-conducting or insulating, according the clauses 5.12
and 5.21.
Page 41 of 295

5.7.1.9. To provide the electrical conduction of the bolted rail joints the following should
be applied:
а) at the underground and closed ground (above ground) sections where the effective
traction current in the peak hours in the both rails of the one track does not exceed 1500 А graphite grease or belleville springs, where the effective traction current exceeds 1500 А graphite grease in combination with electrical connectors, or belleville springs.
b) at the open ground (above ground) sections, track switches, and scissors crossings electrical connectors.
The electric resistance of the bolted rail joint should be no more than the resistance of the
integral rail section with the length of 1 m.
The gap size in the current-conducting bolted rail joints should correspond to the Table
5.7.3.
The insulating bolted rail joints should be provided with polymeric fishplates or should be
of the adhesive-bolted type.
5.7.1.10. At the main line tracks in front of switch blades of the track switches located in
the face direction for the tracks passing in the right direction the fender beams should be
installed. The same fender beams should be installed in front of the switch blades of the track
switches and scissors crossings on the station tracks independently from the direction of the
train traffic.
T a b l e 5.7.3
Gaps in the joints, mm
Temperature of rails* at
underground sections located at the
underground sections located at the
the joint assembling,
distance more than 200 m from the tunnel distance less than 200 m from the tunnel
°С:
portal
portal, ground and above-ground sections
300 m and less
25 m and less rail
от
до
continuously welded
12,5 m rail length
25 m rail length
length
rails length
-60
-50
18,0
-50
-40
16,5
21,0
-40
-25
15,0
-25
-20
19,5
13,5
-20
-15
18,0
-15
-10
12,0
16,5
-10
-5
15,0
9,0
12,0
10,5
-5
0
13,5
0
5
12,0
7,0
9,0
9,0
5
10
10,5
10
15
9,0
4,5
6,0
7,5
15
20
7,5
20
25
6,0
2,0
3,0
6,0
25
30
4,5
30
35
3,0
0
0
4,5
35
40
1,5
40
50
3,0
0
50
60
0
*
Negative temperatures of rails are indicated with «-» symbol.

At the underground and closed above ground sections near the track switches and scissors
crossings location places the sites for storage of metal parts of the track switches and scissors
crossings should be provided at the level of the rail heads.
5.7.1.11. The track switches and scissors crossings located at the open above ground
sections and included in the electrical centralizing should be equipped with automated
pneumatic blowing facilities, or, according the design assignment, with electric heating
facilities.
5.7.1.12. The bridge type flange rails at the above-ground sections of the track should
Page 42 of 295

correspond to the type of the laid rails and should be installed inside the rail gage along the
both rails of the each track. It is recommended to apply the used rails as the flange rails.
5.7.1.13. At the metal bridges with temperature spans more than 100 m the feathered joints
corresponding to the type of the laid rails with bypass electrical connectors should be applied
for compensation of longitudinal shifting of the rails.
5.7.1.14. The following items should be provided as the rail seats:
- wooden cross-ties and wooden short cross-ties according to the GOST 22830;
- wooden beams for the track switches and scissors crossings according to the GOST 8816;
- reinforced concrete cross-ties according to the GOST 10629;
- reinforced concrete and other structures according the approved technical documentation.
The wooden rail seats should be soaked with antiseptics not conducting the electric current.
5.7.1.15. The following items should be provided for laying of the rail seats:
а) On the flat basement made from reinforced concrete or cast-in-situ concrete – as a rule,
track concrete layer;
b) On the road bed - ballast layer;
c) On the bridge structures - ballast layer;
d) On the track switches and scissors crossings - ballast layer.
The wooden rail seat laid on the track concrete layer should be positioned upper face
down, on the ballast layer – upper face up.
The length of the wooden short cross-ties at the main line tracks within the station platform
should be equal to 0,9 m, at the station tracks within the inspection pits - 0,75.
The ends of the wooden cross-ties, bucked at the laying on the track, and newly perforated
in the wooden rail seat wood screw holes should be three times creased with antiseptics not
conducting the electric current.
For the track concrete layer the concrete of В15 class by the compression strength
according to the SNiP 52-01, and for the ballast layer the crushed natural stone of the I20, I40
rocky marks by the abrasive resistance according to the GOST 7392 should be provided.
The cross profile of the track concrete layer should provide the removal of water from the
rails and intermediate rail fastenings.
The following width of the ballast section by the top at the open single-line above-ground
sections should be accepted, m, no less than:
а) At the main line tracks - 3,6;
b) At the station and connecting tracks - 3,4.
At the curve sections of the main line track having the radius less than 600 m the width of
the ballast section from outside should be increased by 0,1 m.
The ballast section slope grade should be 1:1,5.
The surface of the ballast section should be situated 3 cm lower than the upper face of the
wooden rail seat, and should be at the same level with the top of middle part of the reinforced
concrete cross-ties.
The minimum thickness of the track concrete and и ballast layer under the wooden rail seat
should be accepted according to the Table 5.7.4.
The thickness of the ballast layer under the reinforced concrete cross-ties should be 5 cm
more than under the wooden rail seat.
T a b l e 5.7.4
Parameter

Track concrete layer
Ballast layer in the pressed state:
On the flat basement from reinforced
concrete or cast-in-situ concrete

Thickness of layer, cm, no less than
At the rail location places
At the inner rail on the
At the straight and
At the track
curve sections location
curve sections
switches and
places with canting
without canting
scissors crossings
16
10
30

24

24

Page 43 of 295

Thickness of layer, cm, no less than
At the rail location places
At the inner rail on the
Parameter
At the straight and
At the track
curve sections location
curve sections
switches and
places with canting
without canting
scissors crossings
On the road bed
30
30
30
25
25
25
On the above-ground sections
24
24
N o t e – The thickness of the ballast layer above the line is indicated for the main line tracks; under the line for station and connecting tracks.

5.7.1.16. Near the underground stations, as well as in the middle of the underground runs
the length between the station axis more than 1,5 km the 15 - 18 m2 storage area should be
located for storage of heavy line instruments and materials. In the storage area the lighting,
electric power supply for connection of the line instruments, and metal box for storage of fuel
and lubrication materials should be provided. The storage area floor should be arranged at the
level of the rail heads.
Near the connecting chambers the pointsman booth with the area no less than 1,5 m2
should be located. In the booth lighting, electric heating and station communication telephone
should be provided.
5.7.1.17. The calculations of the superstructure should be executed on the base of the
following ranges of the rail temperature fluctuation:
а) At the underground sections situated at the distance more than 200 m from the tunnel
portal - from 0 to 30 °С;
b) At the underground sections situated at the distance less than 200 m from the tunnel
portal, and at the ground and above ground sections – according the technical instructions [2].
5.7.1.18. The project documentation on the track construction should contain the following
information about the track elements:
- piquet and altimetry data of the line stakes;
- piquet and geometry parameters of the elements of plan and longitudinal profile of the
track axis, rails and rail joints.
The composition of the documentation on the new track structures should include the
project of execution of the line works and instructions on their operation.
5.7.1.19. The installation of the wayside and signal markers along the tracks should be
provided.
Near the track switches and scissors crossings the installation of the surveying rods
(surveying poles) should be provided.
5.7.2. Contact rail
5.7.2.1. The contact rail should be located on the left side in the direction of the train
traffic, and at the separate sections by the right side.
At the curve underground sections of the track having the radius less than 200 m the
contact rail should be located on the outer side of the curve, and within the island type
underground station platforms and service platforms – under the platform.
5.7.2.2. The contact rail fastening facilities should provide:
- electric insulation of the contact rail from the superstructure and tunnel linings;
- possibility of regulation of the contact rail position;
- possibility of connection of the electric power supply facilities to the contact rail.
5.7.2.3. The distance between the brackets for the contact rail fixing should be within 4,5m
and 5,4m.
At the main line sections with longitudinal slope more than 40 ‰, and at the curve in the
plan having the radius of 400 m and less the distance between the brackets should be
decreased to 2,5 m.
5.7.2.4. Welding of the contact rails into the rail strings should be executed by the electric
contact method. The length of the rail strings should be equal to, m, no more than:
Page 44 of 295

а) at the underground sections located at the distance more than 200 m from the tunnel
portal at the traction current up to 3000 А - 100, and at the traction current more than 3000 А
- 75;
b) at the underground sections located at the distance less than 200 m from the tunnel
portal, and at the ground и above ground sections - 37,5.
The temperature joints should be provided at the welded rail strings connection places.
The temperature joint electrical resistance should be no more than the resistance of the
integral part of the contact rail with the length of 1,25 m.
The gaps in the temperature joints should be accepted by the Table 5.7.5.
T a b l e 5.7.5
Gaps in the joints, mm
Temperature of rails* at the
underground sections located underground sections located at the distance more
joint assembling, °С:
at the distance more than 200 than 200 m from the tunnel portal, ground и above
m from the tunnel portal
ground sections
from
to
Less than - 30
38
-29
-26
32
-25
-21
30
-20
-16
27
-15
-11
25
-10
-6
38
23
-5
-1
36
20
0
4
32
18
5
9
26
16
10
14
20
14
15
19
14
11
20
24
8
9
25
29
2
7
30
34
0
5
32
39
2
40 and more
0
*
Negative temperatures of rails are indicated with «-» symbol.

The distance between the brackets adjacent to the temperature joints should be no more
than 2,5 m.
5.7.2.5. To prevent the creeping the contact rail should be fixed by means of installation of
four anticreeping devices on the welded rail string regardless from its length. At the main line
tracks located at the longitudinal slope more than 30 ‰, and within the station platform in the
middle of the welded rail string additional paired brackets with anticreeping devices should be
provided.
5.7.2.6. At the places of sectioning of the contact network, and at the places of location of
the track switches, scissors crossings, leveling devices and equipment in the area of the
contact rail laying the contact rail air gaps should be provided.
5.7.2.7. At the places of arrangement of the air gaps at the main line track contact rails the
end ramps with the 1:30 (receiving end) and 1:25 (sending end) slope, and at the station and
connecting tracks – with 1:25 slope should be provided.
The distance between the metal ends of contact rail ramps overlapping by the trolleys of
one passenger car should be no more than 10 m, non-overlapping by the car trolleys - no less
than 14 m.
The equipment installed within the air gap of the contact rail should be located at the
distance no less than 0,8 m from the metal end of the ramp.
5.7.2.8. The length of the contact rail with ending ramps should be no less than 18,7 m. In
the constrained conditions in case it is necessary to locate the equipment in the area of the
contact rail laying, it is allowed to accept the length of the contact rail with ending ramps no
less than 12,5 m with its fixing by the anticreeping devices at the each bracket.
5.7.2.9. It is allowed to accept the length of the contact rail within the inspection pit of the
Page 45 of 295

station track situated behind the area of the rolling stock turnaround according to the clause
5.7.2.8.
5.7.2.10. The calculations of the contact rail should be executed taking into consideration
the range of the rail temperature fluctuations according to the clause 5.7.1.17.
5.8. Ventilation, heat supply, heating, compressed air
5.8.1. Ventilation
5.8.1.1. General provisions
5.8.1.1.1. The systems of the tunnel and local ventilation should be provided according to
the SNiP 32-02 and SNiP 41-01.
5.8.1.1.2. For the heating needs the air removing by the ventilation systems can be used as
the secondary energy resources, as well as the heating and cooling agents of the production
installations suitable for these purposes.
5.8.1.1.3. The allowable levels of the sound pressure at the station premises and in the
main line tunnels should be accepted according the clause 5.17 of the SNiP 32-02, Table 5.
The porous concrete blocks, structures with synthetic and other materials meeting the
requirements to the operation of the Underground Railroad facilities should be used as the
noise absorbing materials.
5.8.1.1.4. For the closed above ground line sections it is allowed to accept the natural
ventilation by means of utilization of piston-like action of the trains.
The possibility of utilization of the natural ventilation in the mode of smoke removal
should be stipulated by calculation.
5.8.1.1.5. The underground and closed above-ground line sections should be equipped with
telemetering control system for the control of the following air parameters:
а) temperature and relative humidity of the air – in one end of the platform part of the
station, in the machine premises of the Tunnel Ventilation Installation;
b) temperature of the air – in the ticket hall of the station vestibule and in the corridor
between the stations;
c) Carbon dioxide – in the both ends of the platform part of the station, in the corridors
between the stations, at the places if accumulation of passengers;
d) Carbon monoxide, explosive and poisonous gases at the sections of: crossing of gasbearing geological layers, gas and oil pipelines located closely to the Petrol Filling Stations,
industrial enterprises, and others – in the machine premises of the Tunnel Ventilation
Installation.
5.8.1.1.6. The structures of ventilation installations should not promote accumulation of
dust and microorganisms, and their distribution within the attended premises. Air-ducts and
other elements of installations capable to accumulate the dust should be equipped with
facilities for cleaning of the internal surfaces.
5.8.1.1.7. In the ventilation installations the devices metering the system productiveness
should be provided.
5.8.1.1.8. Ventilation cabinets of the Local Ventilation Installations can be free-standing,
built in the above-ground station vestibules, or attached to the other buildings.
Air intake cabinets should be located at the places with minimum concentration of harmful
substances and dust in the air, if possible – in the existing or specially created green plantings
areas (trees and bushes).
Location of station installation cabinets at their operation in the mode of smoke removal
should not prevent evacuation of the passengers and personnel.
The air intake and air relief openings of the cabinets should be located at the distance
excluding the recirculation of the removed air, and should be accepted equal to, no less than:
а) for the Tunnel Ventilation Installations - 25 m horizontally;
b) for the Local Ventilation Installations- 10 m horizontally or 6 m vertically.
Distance from the bottom part of the cabinet openings to the ground surface should be no
Page 46 of 295

less than 2 m (for periodically heated places above the level of submergence).
The openings in the air intake and air relief ducts built in the buildings or located at the
distance less than the accepted standard value from the buildings should be located at the
height no less than 2 m over the roof of the highest part of the building situated in the radius
of 10 m.
The structure of cabinets should prevent unauthorized access of people, animals, or
foreign matters inside.
The cabinets should be equipped with intruder alarm according to the clause 5.22.
The cabinets of the deep burial Tunnel Ventilation Installations should be located apart
from the shafts taking into consideration the urban planning conditions and environmental
protection requirements. Location of the cabinets directly at the shaft head is allowed in
extraordinary circumstances.
The entrances to cabinets should have doorsteps with the height of 0,2 m from the ground
level.
Structure of grids on the air intake and air relief openings of cabinets should prevent access
of atmospheric precipitates inside. The metal net with 20×20 mm meshes should be fixed on
the inside of the grids.
In the cabinets of the Tunnel Ventilation Installations the beam having the bearing capacity
no less than 1 ton should be provided.
5.8.1.1.9. In the ventilation installations the equipment providing their comfortable and
safety maintenance, mounting openings, hoisting facilities, and other mechanization facilities
for their transportation through the ventilation cabinets and main line tunnels should be
placed.
The lifting capability and dimensions of the facilities should be accepted on the base of the
transportation conditions of the heaviest and largest element of the equipment.
The ventilators maintenance area, sizes of the openings, and placement of the hoisting
facilities should be provided taking into consideration the instruction issued by the enterprises
– manufacturers of the equipment. For transportation of electric motors and ventilators’
details to the destination points the hand trucks, beams with hoists for manual transportation
of the goods, eyebolts, and other facilities should be provided.
5.8.1.1.10. The ventilation installations’ electric power supply and control should be
provided according the clauses 5.10, 5.11 and 5.16.
5.8.1.2. Tunnel Ventilation
5.8.1.2.1. The ventilation schemes should be either unidirectional - with all-year supply of
the outside air to the main line tunnels and stations, or reversible (bidirectional) – with
seasonal supply of the outside air to the main line tunnels and stations, and, accordingly,
removal of the air from the stations and main line tunnels.
Application of other ventilation schemes providing the meeting of the standard
requirements in all operating modes is allowed.
5.8.1.2.2. To provide the standard conditions in the premises of stations and tunnels it is
allowed in case of substantiation to apply cooling or heating of the air supplied by the
ventilation installations, recirculation of the exhaust air with maintenance of supply of
standard volume of the outside air and smoke removal regime.
5.8.1.2.3. To ventilate the tunnels of turn-around and storage dead ends and main line
tunnel dead end sections the separate ventilation installations with discharge of the air directly
to the ground surface should be provided.
To ventilate the tunnels of single-line dead end located at the run the cross-passages of the
main line tracks to the tunnels should be provided; where appropriate, the ventilator should be
installed in one of them.
5.8.1.2.4. To provide the standard meteorological conditions, air changes per hour, and to
meet the requirements of the clause 5.16 and SNiP 41-01 the amount of intake air (or mixture
Page 47 of 295

of outside and recirculation air) should be stipulated by calculation taking into consideration
the emitting harmful substances.
5.8.1.2.5. To ventilate the tunnels of connecting branches it is allowed to intake the air
from the ground surface or from the main line tunnels.
5.8.1.2.6. In case of application of cooling or heating of the intake air the surface heat
exchanger should be used in the ventilation installations
In case of utilization of the contact air-coolers the recycling water supply with the
treatment of water to the parameters according to the SanPiN (Sanitary Regulations and
Standards) 2.1.4.1074 should be provided.
The refrigeration supply systems should be provided according the SNiP 41-01.
5.8.1.2.7 The Tunnel Ventilation Installation should provide the standard microclimatic
conditions in the passenger premises according to the clause 5.17 of the SNiP 32-02, in this
case the following design parameters of the microclimate in the attended structures and
premises should be accepted:
- in the warm seasons of the year:
а) the air temperature in the platform and ticket halls of the stations, and in the corridors
between the stations, can exceed the design temperature of the outside air by up to 4 °С, but
should be no more than:
1) 28 °С – for cities with design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter of 24 °С
and less;
2) 30 °С - for cities with design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter more
than 24 °С;
b) the temperature of the exhaust air in the end of the designed section for cities with
design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter of 24 °С and less:
1) at the line traffic capacity of 40 train pairs per hour – accordingly, no more than 33°С at
the observance of standard values of integral index of the heat load, in correspondence with
the Appendices 2 and 3 of the SanPiN 2.2.4.548;
2) for cities with design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter more than 24 °С,
regardless of the line traffic capacity – no more than 35 °С at the observance of standard
values of integral index of the heat load, in correspondence with the Appendices 2 and 3 of
the SanPiN 2.2.4.548;
- in the cold seasons of the year:
а) the air temperature in the platform halls of the stations and in the corridors between the
stations:
1) for cities with design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter of 24 °С and less
– no more than 2 °С higher than the natural temperature of the ground, but no less than 5 °С;
2) for cities with design temperatures of outside air by the “А” parameter more than 24 °С
- no more than the natural temperature of the ground, but no less than 10 °С;
b) the air temperature in the ticket halls - no less than 5°С;
The average non-observance of the indicated parameters should be stipulated by the
calculations and compile no more than 650 hours per year.
5.8.1.2.8. The content of the harmful substances in the tunnels and stations should not
exceed the maximum concentration limit according to the GOST 12.1.005 taking into
consideration the background concentration of these substances at the places of disposition of
the air intake facilities.
The content of the harmful substances at the places of the air intake should be accepted
taking into consideration the background concentration of these substances, but no more than
the maximum concentration limit in the air of inhabited area.
In case of exceeding of the maximum concentration limit of the harmful substances at the
places of the air intake the providing of the intake air supply with standard content of the
harmful substances should be executed by means of decreasing of their concentration to the
Page 48 of 295

standard values. The measures and expenses for the normalization of the air media should be
stipulated at the early stages of designing with participation of the territorial governmental
authorities and sanitary-epidemiological supervision services.
5.8.1.2.9. In the calculation of the ventilation systems for the underground and closed
above ground lines the following parameters of the outside air should be accepted:
а) in the warm seasons of the year - the “А” parameters according to the SNiP 41-01;
b) in the cold seasons of the year – for the underground lines - average temperatures and
corresponding to them heat contents for this period according to the SNiP 23-01;
c) for the closed above ground line sections - the “B” parameters according to the SNiP 4101.
The calculations should be executed taking into consideration the following provisions:
а) for the deep burial lines – the changes of the design temperature of the intake air in the
ventilation installation ducts taking into consideration their length and calculation period of
the year;
b) for the shallow lines in the warm seasons of the year – effect of the solar radiation on the
temperature of the surrounding the tunnel grounds;
c) for the unidirectional ventilation scheme with the all-year supply of the outside air to the
run and exhaust from the station – the temperature in the end of designed section should be
accepted equal to the standard parameters for the stations for the corresponding period of the
year.
In the cold seasons of the year the air temperature at the station platforms and in the
corridors between the stations, at the substantiation of impossibility of supporting of the
standard upper temperature limits, should be accepted by the calculation results, wherein the
standard values of the air media parameters can be reached during the calculated срока
operation period. In this case the extreme air temperature should be accepted equal to 16 °С.
5.8.1.2.10. In the Tunnel Ventilation Installations (TVI) of the stations, main line tunnels
and dead ends no less than two ventilators, and in the TVI of the connecting tunnels and
single-line dead ends one ventilator should be provided.
The ventilators should provide supporting of design conditions at the given operating
modes, including the smoke removal, taking into consideration the local climatic conditions.
The each ventilator capacity, depending on the applied ventilation scheme, should compile
50 or 100 % or the required capacity of the TVI.
The ventilator capacity and head should be defined taking into consideration the following:
- Parallel operation of ventilators;
- Piston effect occurring at the train traffic;
- Providing of the smoke removal at the fire or fumigation according to the clause 5.16.
The electrical equipment should be located in the separate premises (electrical building),
adjacent to the machine room. In the electrical building the ventilation and heating systems
providing the air temperature no less than 5 °С should be located.
The machine and electrical premises should be situated at the level of the main line
tunnels, their location at the level of the upper ventilation duct is also allowed.
5.8.12.11. For the ventilation ducts of the track branch leading to electric depot the
separate ventilation or ejection installation located in the near-portal section should be
provided.
In the ejection installation the mixture of air taken from the ground surface and from the
tunnel in the defined by calculation and season ratio or taken from the tunnel only should be
used for creation of the ejection effect. In the installation one ventilator should be provided.
Location of the installation should be defined on the base of the tunnel structure and the
branch track route.
5.8.1.2.12. Connection of the ventilation ducts of the TVI independently to the each tunnel
should be provided. Connection to one tunnel is allowed providing that the cross passage will
Page 49 of 295

be constructed between the tunnels; cross-sectional area of this passage should be defined by
calculation.
The side connection to the main line tunnels and to the cross passage between the tunnels
should be executed from above or, in the exceptional circumstances, from below with
provision of possibility of removal of drain waters from the ventilation ducts located below
the level of the rail heads.
Connection of the ducts from above (with the exception of ducts of the ejection ventilation
installation) or from below directly to the main line tunnels is not allowed.
In the Underground Railroads constructed in the cities with the design outside temperature
in the cold seasons of the year below 0 °С, the connection of the intake ducts to the main line
tunnels should be provided at the distance no less than 100 m from the drainage plant. If
meeting of this requirement is impossible the technical solutions providing the serviceability
of the drainage plant at the negative temperatures should be proposed.
5.8.1.2.13. The amount of the intake air for warm and cold seasons of the year should be
defined taking into consideration the clauses 5.8.1.2.4, 5.8.1.2.7, 5.8.1.2.9:
а) by the excess heat equal to the difference between the heat generation in the tunnels and
heat input to the ground - for the warm season of the year;
b) by the heat generation equal to the sum of the heat generation in tunnels and heat input
from the grounds - for the cold season of the year, and the biggest of the received results
should be accepted.
The following parameters should be defined by calculations:
- Average hourly values of the total heat in the tunnels and stations generated by trains,
equipment, lighting devices, cable networks, and passengers during the day for the train
traffic period;
- Non-steady heat flow from the tunnels to the ground in the warm season of the year, as
well as from the ground to the tunnels in the cold season of the year for the grounds cooling to
the temperature minimally exceeding the natural ground temperature defined before the start
of the line operation;
- Circulating air flows emerging at the train traffic;
- Aerodynamic drag of the air flow duct (including the main line tunnels and station
passenger premises) at the moving of the air supplied by the ventilators taking into
consideration the circulating air flows generated by the pistol action at the train traffic.
The distance between the axes of the two adjacent stations or between the axis of station
and ventilation installation located in the dead end should be accepted as the design section.
Removal of the excessive heat accumulated by the ground in the warm season of the year
should be provided by means of use of maximum performance of the ventilation installations
in the mid-seasons at the outside air temperature above 0 °С and below than the temperature
of the grounds surrounding the tunnels, including the night period.
5.8.1.2.14. The air supply and removal should be provided:
а) At the level of the passenger platform of the stations – by the horizontal ducts under the
platforms or above them, and by the vertical ducts near the both ends of the platform, and
through the openings under and above the platforms or in their ends; additionally at the piertype stations (in case it is possible constructively) by vertical ducts in each pier, with the air
discharge (intake) from the side of the platform and middle halls;
b) In the escalator tunnel – separately by two parts of the tunnel section: upper – passenger,
and lower - ventilation-cable bay (the station shaft constructed for the provision of the
underground construction works, and specially constructed shaft and wells can be used
instead of the ventilation-cable bay);
c) In the corridors between stations having the length less than 50 m – by the corridor
cross-section, more than 50 m – by the air-duct with even air discharge along the corridor, or
with concentrated air discharge, and with the air removal by the corridor cross-section;
Page 50 of 295

d) In the main line tunnels, dead end and connecting tunnels, ticket halls of the station
vestibules, under-street pedestrian crossings – by the cross-sections of the indicated structures.
The height of the horizontal ducts in clear should be no less than 1,8 m; at the separate
sections having the length no more than 15 m it is allowed to decrease their height to 1,1 m.
5.8.1.2.15. The main line TVI should be located taking into consideration the accepted
ventilation scheme:
а) for the scheme of ventilation of the both tunnels using one installation – in the middle of
the run and, if possible, between the tunnels. For the lines constructed in the cities where the
design temperature of the outside air in the coldest month is below 0 °С it is allowed to accept
the distance from the end of the station platform to the point of adjacency of the ventilation
duct to the main line tunnel equal to 1/3 of the run length, but no less than 400 m;
b) for the schemes with separate ventilation for the each tunnel – near the stations, with
proposal of the technical solutions preventing the stations cooling.
5.8.1.2.16. The TVI at the stations should be located by side between the tunnels, and for
the shallow stations – above the stations flooring as well, taking into consideration their plan
specifics.
The entrance to the machine premises should be provided through the portals.
5.8.1.2.17. At the location of the two lines’ TVI at the place of their crossing, the
ventilation shaft of one of installations can be used as the vertical air duct with arrangement of
solid separating partition inside having the fire-resistance rating no less than R 90. The
distance between the ventilation cabinets of the installations should be defined by calculation,
but no less than 25 m.
5.8.1.2.18. The air flow speed should be accepted, m/s, no more than:
а) in the horizontal and vertical ventilation ducts - 8;
b) in the ventilation-cable bays of the escalator tunnels, and, in case of substantiation, in
the ventilation ducts - 15;
c) through the grids of the ventilation cabinets - 5.
5.8.1.2.19. To prevent the tunnels from the overcooling at the places of their exit to the
surface the following equipment should be used:
- damper type air curtains or mixing type warm air curtains;
- cross-passages between the tunnels near the portals (the cross-section should be defined
by calculation) and diaphragms restricting the cross-section area of the tunnels by the
extremely allowable value, located in the each single-line tunnel next to the cross-passage (in
the train traffic direction);
- space air overpressure at the adjacent line section.
5.8.1.2.20. Air relief and air intake openings with adjusted cross-section at the station
should be provided.
5.8.1.2.21. Regulation of the volume of supplied or discharged air at the different operating
modes should be executed by means of change of the number of operating ventilators, speed
of rotation of the ventilator impellers, impeller blades installation angle, application of
throttling devices, or using the other methods.
5.8.1.2.22. To decrease of the effect of «blowing» at the shallow stations between the
adjacent main line tunnels the circulatory cross-passages should be provided in the amount of
two cross-passages per tunnel:
а) the first – at the distance of 70 - 120 m from the platform end, cross-section area 40 - 50
2
m;
b) the second – at the distance no more than 250 m from the first one, but no less than
design train length in the future, cross-section area 20 - 30 m2.
In case of substantiation of impossibility of the second cross-passage construction in the
station vestibules the additional installation of one entrance door line should be provided.
At the stations with gridiron the circulatory cross-passages should be provided on the side
Page 51 of 295

opposite to the gridiron only.
In case of substantiation by calculation it is allowed not provide the ventilation crosspassages.
In case of exceeding of the standard design air flow speed the spatial-and-planning
solutions of the stations providing decrease of the air flow speed should be proposed.
5.8.1.2.23. The places of connection of the machine premises openings and Tunnel
Ventilation Installation ducts, ventilation cross-passages (except for circulatory crosspassages) to the main line and dead end tunnels should be closed by the grids with doors. The
grid attachment fittings should provide their convenient and quick demounting.
5.8.1.2.24. In the TVI the valves with firm adherence of flappers designed for the load no
less than 100 kgf/m2 (1 KPа) should be used as regulating and shutting facilities. Depending
on the application conditions the valves should be equipped with electric and hand drives, or
with hand drive only, and position alarm.
In the partitions of the machine premises dividing the suction and discharge areas the
sealed doors providing the safety passage at the operating ventilators equipped with the
position alarm, or portals should be applied.
5.8.1.2.25. The tunnel ventilation systems should provide the smoke removal and effective
smoke protection of the people evacuation ways in correspondence with the clause 5.16.
In case of impossibility of creation of the smokeless conditions of the escalator tunnel at
the operating tunnel ventilation it is allowed to provide the installation of emergency
pressurization fan in the station vestibule, or to use other methods of increase of the critical air
flow speed.
5.8.1.3. Local Ventilation
5.8.1.3.1. For the ventilation of the underground ticket halls of the station vestibules,
adjacent to them under-street crossings, cable tunnels, and corridors between the stations the
air supplied to the station by the tunnel ventilation system should be applied.
For the ventilation of underground station vestibules including the areas of зоны passenger
service (shops, catering enterprises, etc) the outside air can be applied.
5.8.1.3.2. The volume of the intake air (outside or mixture of outside and recirculation air)
should be defined by calculation according to the SNiP 41-01 or by air changes per hour
according to the Table 5.8.1 on the base of providing of the standard meteorological
conditions, requirements of the clause 5.17 of the SNiP 32-02, clause 5.16.5 of the present
Summary of regulations, or air changes per hour.
T a b l e 5.8.1
Design air temperature, °С, in
the season of the year
cold
worm
1 Passenger premises
10 - 16
Note 1
2 Ticket halls, revenue service premises
19
22
3 Chief of the station, service mechanics, drivers
20
Note 1
field station, police post
4 Medical station
22 - 24
23 - 25
5 Mess rooms
22
Note 1
6 Storage rooms (except for the fuel and Note 1***
Note 1
lubricating materials storage rooms), machine
premises of ventilation installations
7 Fuel and lubricating materials storage room
То же
»
8 Still room
16
»
9 Workshop, wardrobe
16
»
10 Shower room
25
»
11 Premises for the special clothes drying
16
»
Designation (name) of the premises

12 Wardrobe of the shower room
13 Lavatory

23
16

Note 1
Note 1

air changes per hour
intake
6*
6*

discharge
4*
4*

4
4*
4*

6
6*
4*

6
6
-

20
10
6
6
3
25 m /h from
cabinet
100 m3/h per

6
-

Page 52 of 295

Designation (name) of the premises

Design air temperature, °С, in
the season of the year
cold
worm

air changes per hour
intake

discharge
lavatory basin
4
5
4
3*
4*
4*

14 Washing room
16
»
15 Pumping room at the station
5***
»
16 Heating point, water metering station
5***
»
4
17 Accumulator room
Note 1***
30
3*
18 Machine room of the substation
То же
35
4*
**
19 Switchboard room of substation, electrical
16
30
4*
building
20 Cable tunnel
35
4
4
21 Machine room of escalators
16***
Note 2
8*
6*
22 Automated check-point Controller and escalator
22**
Note 1
3 (but no less
operator booths
than 60 m3/h)
23 Corridor between the stations
Note 1***
Note 2
4*
4*
**
*
24 Dispatcher point of the station
20
22
6
4*
**
*
25 Relay room, equipment room, switch room,
18
28
6
4*
radio center, Line-switching room
*
To be checked by calculation, the maximum value to be accepted, ** - electric heating to be applied, *** - the
heating not required.
Notes
1. The design temperature should be accepted according to the clause 5.8.1.2.7 applicably to the passenger
premises of the stations (here and below - taking into consideration ***).
2. To be accepted 5 °С above the design outside temperature, but no more than 28 °С.
3. In the premises with continuous residence of personnel, where more than 40 % of the walls, ceiling and
floor surface directly adjoin to the ground the design temperature of the heating air should be accepted 2 °С
above the temperature indicated in the Table.

The calculation of the air exchange in the production premises with excessive heat should
be executed taking into consideration assimilation of heat by the intake air without
considering of the heat input to the ground.
The air changes per hour according the Table 5.8.1 for the premises of above ground
vestibules with windows, except for the premises indicated in the items ## 4, 5, 10, 12, 13,
should be decreased by 60 %.
5.8.1.3.3. The ventilation installations of the machine premises of the traction step-down
substation (TSS) should be provided with no less than two blowing machines and two exhaust
ventilators; capacity of the each of them should be no less than 50 % of the design capacity of
the installation. The ventilation installations of the production, administrative, and other
premises with continuous residence of people at the underground stations should be provided
with no less than two blowing machines and two exhaust ventilators; capacity of the each of
them should be no less than 50 % of the design capacity of the installation.
5.8.1.3.4. For the premises with continuous residence of people where the supply of the
outside air is supposed, separate ventilation installations with the air heating in the cold
season of the year by the air heaters, or with the air cooling in the warm season of the year by
the air conditioners should be installed.
The air supply to the production and domestic premises without continuous residence of
people should be provided from the tunnels or stations. The outside air supply to such
premises should be provided in case of impossibility of providing of the standard air
parameters in the premises using the air taken from tunnels or stations.
5.8.1.3.5. The premises of medical centers, lavatories, sewerage installations, and fuel and
lubrication materials storage rooms should be equipped with separate exhaust ventilation
installations.
5.8.1.3.6. The equipment of the Local Ventilation Installation premises, lavatories, medical
centers, and fuel and lubrication materials storage rooms should be installed in the separate
premises.
Page 53 of 295

5.8.1.3.7. In case of location of the openings designated for the air intake or relief in the
main line tunnel partitions the projection of the opening in the plan should be located outside
the minimum fixed structure.
5.8.1.3.8. It is allowed to place the air intakes and air relieves in the under-street crossings
being the entrances to the underground station vestibules, except for the air relieves from the
premises of lavatories, fuel and lubrication materials storage rooms, machine rooms of
escalators, medical centers, and shower rooms. The air flow speed through the facilities air
intake and air relief grids should be defined in the base of conditions of their location, but no
more than 5 m/s.
5.8.1.3.9. The air consumption supplied to the stair enclosures between the premises of
three and more floors should be defined taking into consideration creation of 20 Pа
overpressure in them (at the closed doors) relating to the pressure in the premises. The stair
enclosure doors should correspond to the clause 6.18 of the SNiP 21-01.
The intake air consumption in the machine rooms of escalators and TSS should be defined
on the base of conditions of assimilation of excessive heat generating at the operation of
equipment.
The intake air consumption for the AB premises, depending on the battery type should be
defined by calculation.
5.8.1.3.10. The air supplied to the production and domestic premises of the underground
stations should be taken:
а) to the premises at the level of the vestibule floors – from the ground surface, from the
under-street crossing near the staircases, or from the tunnel;
b) to the premises at the level of the platform part of the station – from the station or from
the main line tunnel.
The air from the premises of lavatories, sewerage installations, fuel and lubrication
materials storage rooms, medical centers, shower rooms, premises for the special clothes
drying, and machine rooms of escalators should be discharged to the ground surface. In case
of substantiation it is allowed to discharge the air from the medical centers and lavatories to
the tunnel. In the ventilation installations in this case the reserve ventilators and filters
designed for the full capacity of the system should be provided.
In case of the air discharge from the premises of lavatories and sewerage installations at the
deep burial stations to the ground surface the circular space between the discharge line of the
installation and its casing well should be used, and in case of the air discharge from the
premises of lavatories at the shallow stations the individual air-duct should be provided.
The air discharged from the other premises should be returned to the tunnel after the place
of its intake in the direction of train traffic from the station, to the ground surface, or to the
under-street pedestrian crossing.
5.8.1.3.11. For the equipment rooms of the train traffic control, accumulator and machine
rooms of escalators the separate air handling ventilation installations should be provided.
Where appropriate, the air recirculation and smoke removal in case of the fire according to the
SNiP 41-01, as well as air heating or cooling should be provided.
The air discharge from the machine rooms of escalators of the interchange facilities of the
deep burial stations to the tunnels or ventilation ducts under the platform taking into
consideration the operation of the tunnel ventilation and organization of the smoke removal
mode should be provided.
5.8.1.3.12. For the fuel and lubrication materials storage rooms the separate exhaust
ventilation installations should be provided. The air intake should be provided from the
corridors, through the overpressure valves installed in the walls of the portal-gates at the
entrances to these premises.
For the machine rooms of the underground TSS the separate air handling ventilation
installations should be provided with the air intake from the ground surface or from the main
Page 54 of 295

line tunnel out of which the train arrives to the station, and air exhaust to the main line tunnel
after the station in the train traffic direction; for the switchboard premises of the substations
the air handling ventilation installations with the air intake from the main line tunnel should
be provided.
It is allowed to apply the recirculation ventilation systems with the air cooling.
5.8.1.3.13. The ventilation of the premises of the drainage plants situated between the main
line tunnels should be provided using the piston pressure of the air emerging at the train
traffic, with arrangement of the openings for the air intake in the premises doors. The
premises of the drainage plants situated by the tunnel sides should be equipped with Local
Ventilation Installation with the air exhaust to the main line tunnel after the entrance to the
premises in the train traffic direction.
5.8.1.3.14. The location of the ventilation installations equipment should be provided
according to the SNiP 41-01. The fire safety valves used in the ventilation systems should meet
the requirements of the NPB (Fire Safety Regulations) 241.
The ventilators of the exhaust installations of the fuel and lubrication materials storage
rooms should be of explosion-proof type with the explosion-proof electrical drive. At the
intake section of the air-duct, near its input to the machine room of the installation the relief
valve or pressurized valve with electrical drive blocked with the ventilator should be
provided; in case of fire the ventilator should be automatically cut off, and the pressurized
valve should be closed.
In the machine rooms of the installations the embedded details for fixing of the small
inventory hoisting tools and equipment should be provided.
5.8.1.3.15. To provide the standard air parameters in the vestibules and platform halls of
the stations in the cold season of the year in the cities with the average outside air
temperature below 0 °С in the coldest month the warm air or air curtain should be provided.
The temperature and heat content of the outside air for the warm air curtain calculation should
be accepted by the “B” parameters of the SNiP 41-01.
The air intake for the warm air curtain should be provided from the premises of the ticket hall
of the vestibule, the air exhaust should be provided to the portal between the two door lines of
the entrance to the ticket hall. Other schemes of the air exhaust and intake (by vertical flow,
by uniflow to the portal and to the ticket hall), and utilization of the suspended and floorstanding warm air curtain are allowed.
At the horizontal discharge the air speed in the discharge grid should be no more than 6
m/s, the bottom of the grid should be located at the height of 0,3 m from the floor, and the top
of the grid should be no higher than 1,5 m.
At the vertical discharge the air speed should be defined depending of the height of the
intake grid location.
At the calorifer inputs the conditioning of the supplied air in the dust filters should be
provided.
The warm air curtains should be calculated for supply of the air to the portal with the
temperature no more than 45 °С in the volume required for the heating of the outside air
incoming to the ticket hall to the temperature of 5 °С.
The shut-off valves at the calorifer pipelines should be equipped with electrical drives.
The necessity of installation of the air curtains or warm air curtains in the tunnel portals
should be stipulated by calculation on the base of providing of the nearest to the portal station
air temperature no less than 5 °С in the cold season of the year.
5.8.1.3.16. In the production and domestic premises of the stations the air-ducts made from
inflammable materials meeting the sanitary-and-hygienic requirements should be installed
The transit air-ducts laid to the sanitary-domestic, domestic, and production premises, or
through these premises at the places of passing through the structures with rated firePage 55 of 295

resistance limits should comply with the SNiP 41-01. The fire-resistance rating of the air-ducts
should be defined according the NPB 239.
Laying of the transit air-ducts through the fuel and lubrication materials storage rooms is
not allowed.
5.8.1.3.17. Development of technical solutions regarding the utilization of secondary
energy resources should be executed according to the SNiP 41-01.
5.8.2. Heat supply
5.8.2.1. The external heating network inputs should be provided in the premises of the heat
points located in the station vestibules; the height of the premises should be no less than 2,2
m, the width of passages for maintenance of equipment should be no less than 0,8 m. The heat
points should be designed taking into consideration the SP 41-101.
It is not allowed to place the heat points, warm air curtains, and Local ventilation
Installation with overheated water as the heat-transfer agent over the passenger premises,
equipment rooms, relay rooms, switch rooms, substations, machine rooms of escalators, and
over the main line tunnelми. The floors of the heat point premises, warm air curtains, and
Local ventilation Installation should be equipped with metal water-proofing with the outlet to
the walls at the height 200 mm more than the finished floor level.
5.8.2.2. At the application of one heat input at the station the heat points of vestibules
should be connected by the pipeline laid in the underground gallery having the height no less
than 1100 mm. At the shallow stations it is allowed to lay the pipeline in the ventilation duct
under the platform; in this case the shut-off valves equipped with electrical drive and remote
control from the Station Dispatcher Point should be installed on the pipeline of the heat
points, and instrumental quality testing of the all joints welding, and protection of the joints
using the 300 mm length cases should be executed.
5.8.2.3. The adjacent to the station vestibules heat network channels having the height of
1500 mm at the length of 5 m should be made from cast-in-situ reinforced concrete with
water-proofing.
5.8.2.4. The pipeline inputs should be executed through the fixed supports installed on the
wall of the underground vestibule. The wall should have the heat-resistant water-proofing on
the area of the adjacent heat network channel.
The steel shut-off valves, electrically-insulating flanges, and the heat consumption remote
measurement devices should be provided at the input pipelines.
The equipment of the heat point and water metering unit should be located in the separate
premises.
5.8.2.5. The water discharge from the heat network channels to the municipal sewerage
networks should be provided.
5.8.3. Heating
5.8.3.1. The heating of the following positions should be provided:
а) In the cities where the average temperature of the outside air in the coldest month is
below 0°С – in the ticket halls, sanitary-domestic, production, and other premises of the
underground and above ground station vestibules;
b) In the cities where the average temperature of the outside air in the coldest month is
above 0°С – in the premises of the fare collectors and premises with continuous residence of
personnel.
The design temperatures and heat content of the outside air for the above ground premises
heating systems calculation (including the air heating) should be accepted by the “B”
parameter according to the SNiP 41-01.
The design temperatures in the premises should be accepted according to the Table 5.8.1.
5.8.3.2. The municipal distributing heat networks of the heat-electric generating station,
regional boiler installations, water and steam boiler installations of enterprises and dwelling
houses, as well as self-contained heat energy sources should be used as the heat supply
Page 56 of 295

sources.
5.8.3.3. As the heat transfer agents the following matters should be provided:
а) for the heating of domestic and production premises of the above ground and
underground station vestibules, as well as premises of shallow stations – water having the
temperature of 95 - 70°С, or electrical heating devices;
b) for the air heaters of the warm air curtains at the entrances to the ticket halls of the
station vestibules, intake Local ventilation Installations, heat registers of the underfoot grids
in the above ground vestibules, heating devices of the ticket halls of the vestibules – water
having the temperature of 150 - 70 °С. In case of substantiation it is allowed to apply the
electric power for heating of the station vestibule premises, including the ticket hall;
c) for the domestic and production premises at the level of platform part of the deep burial
stations, as well as for the automated check-point and escalator duty officer booths, and at the
station platform - electrical heating devices;
d) For heating of the stairs of the under-street crossing staircases combined with the
entrances to the underground station vestibules, as well as adjacent to the staircases 3 m
length pavement sections – electrical heating cables, electrical infrared radiators with
protected heating elements, or other devices providing the design temperature of the heated
surfaces no less than 3 °С.
For the main line tunnels and other structures subjected to icing it is allowed to apply the
electrical infrared radiators with protected heating elements.
5.8.3.4. The heating devices in the station vestibule ticket halls should be protected by the
removable 4×4 mm metal mesh and decorative grids made from the inflammable materials.
The distance to the grid bottoms should provide the opportunity for the floor cleaning.
5.8.3.5. Heating of the underfoot grids in the above ground station vestibules should be
provided only in the cities where the average temperature of the outside air in the coldest
month is below 0°С. The underfoot grid heat registers made from the steel seamless pipes
should be provided.
Heating of the stair of staircases and pavement sections located in front of the staircases
should be provided for the regions where the average temperature of the outside air in the
coldest month is below 0 °С. The design temperature of the outside air should be the value
above which the total snowfall period compiles no less than 80 % of the time of all snowfalls
per year.
5.8.3.6. In the premises of drainage plants located by the side of the main line tunnels and
at the tunnel sections where the air temperature can fall below 5 °С the electrical heating
should be provided.
5.8.3.7. The electrical heating devices should be equipped with closed heating elements
and should have the surface temperature no more than 95 °С, they should be fixed-sited, and
their connection to the electric power network should correspond to the clause 5.10.4.8.
5.8.4. Compressed air
5.8.4.1. In the bottom part of the escalator tunnel, or in one of passages between the
escalator structures the 50 mm conditional diameter steel pipe should be provided. The branch
tubes with valves for connection of pneumatic mechanisms should be installed at the pipe in
25 m.
The compressed air supply to the pipe from the portable compressor should be provided.
The pipe should be drawn off to the ground surface to the place preventing the unauthorized
connection to it.
5.9. Water supply, drainage, sewerage
5.9.1. Water supply
5.9.1.1. At the selection of integrated or separate water pipeline systems the characteristics
of the water supply sources and demand in water for different needs should be taken into
consideration.
Page 57 of 295

5.9.1.2. The water consumption for drinking needs should be accepted on the base of
number of personnel in the largest shift according to the Appendix 5.14Б and SNiP 2.04.01.
The water consumption for technological needs should be defined in the base of the water
demand of the corresponding equipment.
The water consumption for the wet cleaning of the passenger premises of the station and
adjacent main line tunnel sections should be defined in the base of simultaneous operation of
all facilities having the following water consumption, l/s:
а) 50 mm diameter outside tap - 3,0;
b) five 20 mm diameter outside taps - 0,5;
c) flushing aggregate - 6,5.
The water consumption for fire extinguishing should be defined according to the clause
5.16. In this case the water consumption for using of showers, flushing of the structures and
facilities should not be taken into consideration.
5.9.1.3. The water pipeline inputs from the municipal water pipeline network to the each
station vestibule using the tubes having the diameter no less than 100 mm with arrangement
of the water metering units on them should be provided. In case of substantiation it is allowed
to provide inputs to one station vestibule by two tubes with arrangement of one water
metering unit. The water metering units should be located in the separate room.
The electrical driven shut-off valves, relief valves, electrical insulating flanges, and remote
and local water consumption metering devices should be provided at the inputs.
The pipes should pass through the walls using the glands.
5.9.1.4. The bypass lines equipped with electrical driven shut-off valves should be
provided at the water metering units designated for the fire extinguishing.
5.9.1.5. In case of insufficient hydrostatic head at the input the fire-fighting booster
pumping plants located in the water metering unit premises should be applied.
The plant should provide the required efficiency of the water flow and fire cock discharge
head during the fire extinguishing at the shallow station platform or in the premises of the
deep burial station vestibules.
The plant should be equipped with two pumps, one of which is reserved pump
automatically activated in case of the main pump failure.
5.9.1.6. The conditional diameter of the water pipeline elements should be no less than,
mm:
а) Bypass line of the water metering unit, water mains at the stations and in the dead ends 100;
b) Water mains in tunnels - 80;
c) Distribution network – according the calculations.
5.9.1.7. The water pipeline laying should be provided in the each tunnel at the height of 0,6
- 0,8 m from the level of the rail heads on the low-current side. In case of its location on the
high-current side the water pipeline should be placed into the duct.
In the double-line tunnel the water pipeline should be laid by the both sides.
At the place of the track crossing the water pipeline should be laid in the track concrete
layer in correspondence with the requirements of the clause 5.21.
5.9.1.8. At the tunnel water pipeline electrical driven shut-off valves located at the station,
and hand driven shut-off valves located in the tunnels and at the closed above ground sections
in 500 m should be applied.
The water pipeline sections laid in the tunnels adjacent to the intake TVI should be
separated by the electrical driven shut-off valves. The shut-off valves should be located in the
positive temperature area of the tunnel.
The dead end sections of the water pipeline should be interconnected with shunt pipe with
hand driven shut-off valve installed on it.
Application of the ball flanged valves instead of shut-off valves is allowed.
Page 58 of 295

5.9.1.9. At the water pipeline network should be installed:
- 20mm diameter outside taps:
а) in the pedestrian under-street crossings near the staircases, near the entrances to the
station vestibules, near the entrances and exits of the ticket halls of the station vestibules;
b) in the machine rooms of escalators, in the ventilation and pumping plant premises, in the
calorifer rooms, and in the substation basements;
c) in the each under-balustrade passage and in the ventilation-and-cable bay of the
escalator tunnels;
d) in the under-platform part of stations, in the corridors between stations, in the cable
galleries, in the ventilation ducts of the Tunnel Ventilation Installation;
e) in the main line tunnels and at the closed above ground sections. The distance between
the outside taps should be no more than 30 m. At the short sections of the route no less than 2
taps should be placed;
- water hydrants for cold and hot water at the height of 0,5 - 0,7 m from the floor in one of
ends of the platform part of the station, in the mess and rest room of the station dispatcher
point, in the blocks of production and domestic premises at the all levels of the station
vestibules;
- fire cocks, in correspondence with the clause 5.16;
- taps for filling of flushing aggregates (two 50mm diameter cocks with connection heads)
in the tunnels and at the closed above ground line sections in 450 m.
5.9.1.10. The water pipelines for the underfoot grids pit flushing should be provided at the
entrances to the station vestibules and near the staircases leading to the under-street crossings,
and for the ventilation tunnels flushing - in the Tunnel Ventilation Installation.
5.9.1.11. The main and distributing networks of the water pipeline should be laid open in
the cable galleries, corridors, and production premises. In the switchboard premises,
equipment, switch, storage, wardrobe rooms, etc, the laying of the water pipeline is not
allowed.
The cold water sections of the water pipeline having the diameter of 50mm and more
(except for the flow pipe to the fire cocks) in the corridors and premises of the station
vestibules, and long-distance hot water sections of the water pipeline (for example, at the
laying in the ventilation-and-cable bay of the escalator tunnel) should be equipped with the
heat-insulation.
At the deep burial stations at the section from the vestibule to the level of the passenger
platform the water pipeline should be laid through the special well, or in the ventilation-andcable bay of the escalator tunnel.
5.9.1.12. In the station vestibules and TSS the hot water supply should be provided to the
wash basins and showers from the boilers of the station heat supply system, or from the
electrical water heaters. For the period of heat supply system cutout the electrical water
heaters for the hot water supply to the wash basin of one of still rooms and to the two showers
should be provided.
The shower rooms in the technical maintenance point, and wash basins in the machine
rooms of escalators of the interchange station facilities should be supplied with the hot water
from the electrical water heaters.
In the mess premises, medical center, and in one of still rooms of the station vestibule the
electrical boilers should be installed.
5.9.2. Drainage
5.9.2.1. The drainage system includes the gravity gutters and pipes, filling sumps and floor
gullies, drainage pumping plants, pressure pipelines and external networks.
5.9.2.2. The water drainage from the under-street crossings, corridors between the stations,
ventilation and cable ducts, main line and station tunnels with the track concrete layer to the
drainage plant water collectors should be provided by gravity in the open gutters. For laying
Page 59 of 295

of the gutters between the single-line main line tunnels the passways should be provided.
5.9.2.3. The water intake through the floor gullies or grid sumps, and water drainage by
gravity through the pipes should be provided:
- In the tunnels with the broken stone underlayer of the track;
- in the passenger premises of the stations and between the stations;
- in the machine rooms of escalators, in the premises of the Local Ventilation Installation,
water pipeline inputs, heating points, still rooms, accumulator rooms, in the corridors of the
station premises;
- At the places of the water discharge from the floor washing machines with arrangement
of the dirt collector ditch with the volume of no less than 1 m3.
5.9.2.4. The gravity drainage pipes diameter should be no less than 100 mm, bending – no
less than 120 degrees, slopes of pipes and gutters – no less than 3 ‰, distance between the
floor gullies at the platform, or sumps on the pipes – no more than 20 m.
The water drainage gutters should be made from the water-proof material, the cross-section
area should be no less than 120 cm2.
In the main line tunnels with the broken stone underlayer of the track (at the places of the
track switches location) for the water drainage two 200 mm diameter pipes, and in the
constraint conditions - three 150 mm diameter pipes should be provided.
The floor gullies, sumps, cleanout pipes should be located at the places accessible for their
cleaning.
5.9.2.5. The depth of pits with underfoot grids at the entrances to the above-ground station
vestibules should be equal to 1 m, near the staircases to the under-street crossings – no less
than 0,65 m, capacity of the sedimentation section – no less than 3 m3.
5.9.2.6. The main water drainage plants should be located at the lower sections of the line
route, transit plants – in the middle of sections with long down route grades (at the distance
from the drainage line to the lower point more than 1500 m), local plants – in the lower places
of stations and near-tunnel structures, out of which the water cannot be removed by gravity.
At the station, in case it is located at the long down grade section of the route the main
drainage plant should be provided instead of transit one.
The each drainage plant should be located in the separate room.
In the cities where the average temperature of the outside air in the coldest month is below
0 °С the drainage plant in the main line tunnels should be located, as a rule, at the distance no
less than 100m from the ventilation duct of the intake Tunnel Ventilation Installation.
5.9.2.7. The main drainage plant should be equipped with no less than two working and
one reserve pumps, the transit and local plants – one working and one reserve pumps, the
local plant near the staircase to the corridor of the underground station vestibule – one fixed
and one portable pumps.
The each pump capacity, m3/h, should be no less than:
- for the main and transit plants:
а) at the deep burial lines - 150;
b) at the shallow lines - 50;
- for the local plants - 50.
The volume of the water collectors in the plants should be accepted according to the Table
5.9.1.
T a b l e 5.9.1
Plant type
Deep burial line:
main
transit
local
Shallow line:

Water collector volume, m3, no less than
working
total
30
15
7

70
40
7

Page 60 of 295

Plant type
Main and transit
local

Water collector volume, m3, no less than
working
total
15
30
4
4

The working volume of the water collector should be defined from the water level at which
all pumps are out to the water level at which the last of the installed pumps is on. The total
volume of the water collector should be defined from the water level at which all pumps are
out to the bottom of the water collector of the drainage plant at the shallow station, and to the
flange of the cross-ties – for the other plants.
At the drainage plant the pump priming facilities should be provided.
5.9.2.8. The drainage plant premises should be equipped with the hand driven materialshandling machines.
5.9.2.9. For the drainage plants: main, transit, at the subfluvial sections of the line, and
local (except for the plants near the staircases) two pressure pipelines should be provided.
The pressure and gravity pipelines should be connected to the municipal network of the
stormwater drainage or combined sewerage system through the dirt collectors having the
volume no less than 2 m3.
Drainage water volume remote control devices should be provided at the pipelines.
The dirt collector ditches at the places of connection of the drainage pipes to the municipal
network of the stormwater drainage or combined sewerage system should be located at the
places accessible for their mechanical cleaning.
At the deep burial line sections the drainage of water from the water collectors of the local
drainage plants to the water drainage gutters of the main line tunnels should be provided.
5.9.2.10. At the main and transit drainage plants the water collectors should have three
compartments (one of them is sedimentation compartment), at the local plants - two (one of
them is sedimentation compartment).
The each compartment should have the inspection hatches, staircases and bridges, bypass
valves and overflow openings in the partitions, sediment detachment facilities. Under the
suction valves of the suction pump line the 200mm depth pits should be arranged. The water
collector bottom slope toward the pits should be no less than 2 ‰.
The water level alarm should be installed in the water collectors.
5.9.2.11. The drainage plant floor level should be:
а) For the main and transit plants - 0,25 m over the track rail heads level; for the drainage
plants of dead ends with inspection pits it is allowed to arrange the drainage plant floor level
0,15 m below the track rail heads level.
b) For the local and main drainage plants of the shallow stations – not higher than the floor
level of adjacent premises.
The height of the pump foundations should be no less than 0,2 m from the floor level.
5.9.2.12. At the deep burial lines the laying of the pressure pipelines of the main and transit
drainage plants to the ground surface should be provided in the wells.
5.9.3. Sewerage
5.9.3.1. For the waste water drainage from the structures located below the ground surface
the sewerage pumping plants should be applied.
5.9.3.2. The sewerage pumping plants should be provided with two pumps – one working
and one reserve; in separate cases installation of one working pump and storage of the reserve
pump in the storage premises is allowed.
Installation of pumps should be provided under the flood from the waste water level in the
intake reservoir.
The sewerage pumping plants should be located in the separate rooms.
5.9.3.3. The separate suction pipeline with recovery to the pump no less than 0,5 ‰ should
be provided for the each sewerage pump. The shut-off valves should be installed at the
suction and discharge pipelines of the each pump, additionally the relief valve should be
Page 61 of 295

installed at the discharge pipeline.
5.9.3.4. In the intake reservoir of the sewerage pumping plants the sediment detachment
facilities, hermetic inspection hatches, safety grid at the pump suction pipelines, fluid level
alarms should be provided.
The slope of the reservoir bottom toward the pits under the suction lines should be no less
than 10 ‰.
In the sewerage pumping plants of the rolling stocks technical maintenance point the
arrangement of oil removers should be provided.
5.9.3.5. The discharge pipeline from the sewerage pumping plants should be connected to
the municipal sewerage network.
At the pipelines the discharged fluid volume remote and local control devices should be
installed.
At the deep burial lines the discharge pipelines laying to the ground surface should be
executed in wells.
5.9.4. Pipelines
5.9.4.1. In the water pipeline networks, water drainage and sewerage the following pipe
types should be applied:
а) for the main water pipelines – pipes made from corrosion-proof steel according to the
GOST 9940; for the distributing network – galvanized steel pipes according to the GOST 3262;
б) for the heating network pipelines – steel seamless pipes according to the GOST 8732 and
longitudinal electric-welded steel pipes according to the GOST 10704;
в) for the pressure pipelines of the water drainage and sewerage - steel seamless pipes
according to the GOST 8732;
г) for the open or closed laid gravity pipelines - electric-welded steel pipes according to the
GOST 10704 or cast iron sewerage pipes according to the GOST 6942. In case of laying outside
the construction facilities – cast iron pressure pipes according to the GOST 9583.
The thickness of the pipe walls should be defined by calculation.
5.9.4.2. The pipeline, takeoff and mixing fittings should be selected in correspondence
with the operating pressure in the network. The stop valves of 50mm diameter and less should
be made from nonferrous alloys.
5.9.4.3. The steel pipelines should be protected from the chemical and electrical corrosion
according to the GOST 9.602 and clause 5.21.
5.9.4.4. In the water pipeline (including the fire pipelines), water drainage and sewerage
networks in case of substantiation application of pipes made from composite, cynthetic, or
other materials instead of the metal pipes is allowed.
5.10. Electric power supply
5.10.1. Electrical calculations. Grounding
5.10.1.1. The calculation of the 10 KV voltage electric power supply network of the TSS
should be executed for normal, operating and emergency modes on the base of the following
conditions:
а) Normal mode - TSS electric power supply from the first electric power source of the
energy system by two parallel lines, from the second and third electric power source – by one
line. The voltage at the designed TSS should be 5 % above the rated voltage, at the adjacent
ones – rated voltage;
b) Operating mode – failure of one line from the first electric power source. The voltage at
the designed TSS should be 5 % above the rated voltage, at the adjacent ones – rated voltage;
c) Emergency node - failure of the first electric power source. The TSS electric power
should be supplied from the adjacent TSS. In case of availability of two lines (jumpers)
between the TSS and power supply from one TSS the sectional breakers of the 10 KV
switchboard and rated voltage at the both TSS should be provided.
The cables for the normal and operating modes of power supply should be selected by the
Page 62 of 295

allowable sustained currents, for the emergency mode – by the allowable cable overload
according to the clause 5.10.1.3.
The cables should be tested for the thermal resistance in the short-circuit mode.
5.10.1.2. The traction load should be defined without considering of recuperation.
At the calculation of the traction loads for the selection of the number of converting units,
cable lines, and equipment of the traction network the following should be accepted:
- Frequency of the train traffic at the peak hours, and number of subway cars in them for
the first period of operation and at the maximum development of the line;
- Influence of the external characteristics of the TSS and deviation from the train traffic
schedule within ± 15 s;
- 5 % more than the rated value voltage in the 10 KV switchboard buses of the designed
TSS in the normal mode, and rated voltage at the adjacent TSS;
- Switching off the one converting unit at the designed TSS, and switching on the all
converting units at the adjacent TSS. At the designed TSS the voltage in the 10 KV
switchboard buses should be 5 % more than the rated value, at the adjacent TSS - rated
voltage.
No less than three converting units (taking into consideration the reserve one) should be
installed at the TSS.
5.10.1.3. The parameters of the electrical equipment, commutation devices, cables, wires,
and buses should be accepted according the loads and short-circuit current calculation results
for the normal, operating, and emergency modes of work eliminating availability of «blind
areas».
The cable lines load current for the emergency mode should compile 115 % of the value of
allowable sustained current indicated in the regulatory documentation.
5.10.1.4. On the base of traction loads and traction network parameters calculation results
the maximal allowable frequency of the train traffic in the line should be defined at the failure
of 825 V switchboard of one of the TSS and normal mode of the other TSS work (the
calculation should be executed for the each TSS at the rated voltage in the 10 KV buses of the
adjacent TSS).
5.10.1.5. The 10 KV and 825 V voltage power networks, as well as the substation
dimensions should be defined on the base of maximal design parameters for the any period
according to the clause 3.13 of the SNiP 32-02.
5.10.1.6. The voltage losses in the 380/220 V power networks from the substation
switchboard buses to the electrical receivers should compile, %, no more than:
- At the stations
- 5;
- At the main line tunnels:
а) Normal power supply mode
- 8;
b) Emergency mode
- 12.
5.10.1.7. The equipment of the TSS and traction network should provide receipt and
utilization of the train recuperation electric power.
5.10.1.8. The calculations of the short-circuit currents for the AC electrical installations
with the voltage more than 1 KV should be executed according to the RD (Working
Documentation) 153-34.0-20.527 taking into consideration the PUE (rules for arrangement of
electrical installation) regulations.
5.10.1.9. In the electrical installations grounding system of the line the cast iron lining of
the tunnels, metal insulation of the reinforced concrete structures, metal structures of the
shoring of trenches, specially plugged pipes should be used as the earthing devices. It is
allowed to use the steel bands designated for laying of the single cables of the main line
tunnel lighting as the ground conductors.
The resistance of the TSS earthing devices should be no more than 0,5 Ohm.
For the step-down substations (SS) located in the station vestibules and other line sections
Page 63 of 295

it is allowed no to consider separate earthing devices.
The structural execution of the earthing devices should correspond to the PUE.
5.10.2. Substations
5.10.2.1. The TSS should be provided at the each station, the alternate solution should be
approved by calculations.
The TSS should be located at the level of the main line tunnels.
The SS should be installed at the station in case it is not equipped with the TSS, in the deep
burial station vestibules, and, where appropriate, at the runs and in the free-standing facilities.
5.10.2.2. The first electric power source should be connected to the first section of the TSS
10KV switchboard buses, the second source (from the first section of the adjacent TSS 10KV
switchboard buses) – to the second section of the 10KV switchboard buses. Connection of the
third electric power source, in case of its availability, should be defined at the development of
the substation line power supply diagram.
The SS electric power supply from one or two nearest TSS relating to their location should
be provided.
5.10.2.3. The TSS 10KV switchboard buses should be divided to two sections with the
breaker between them. The high-voltage fuses should be provided for connection of Train
Traffic Control transformers and voltage transformers to the 10KV switchboard, and electrical
driven breakers for other connection.
5.10.2.4. The 825 V switchboard buses should be provided without sectioning. The
composition of the switchboard should include one or two reserve power supply lines for
replacement of the main power supply lines of the contact network, and earthing disconnector
of the positive bus.
The high-speed circuit breakers should be used as the switching units and protection from
the short-circuit current.
The negative 825 V bus should be isolated.
5.10.2.5. At the TSS the separate 380/220 V switchboards should be provided for the
power supply to:
- electromechanical installations (switchboard 1);
- lighting installations, communication unit, and Automated Fare Payment System
(switchboard 2);
- Train Traffic Control units (switchboard 3).
The switchboards should include two bus sections; in the switchboard 2 it is allowed to
provide three sections – two working and one reserve designated for the main line tunnel
operating lighting power supply.
It is allowed to connect the reserve section to the working sections of buses using the
electrical driven breakers.
The automated breakers should be provided in the switchboard for connection of
transformers and outgoing lines.
5.10.2.6. The each 380/220 V switchboard working bus section feeding should be provided
from the transformer connecting to the correspondent 10 KV switchboard bus section.
The each transformer in the emergency mode (one of transformers failure) should provide
the design load of the both 380/220 V switchboard sections with allowable overload.
The calculation of the transformers power should be executed according to the Appendix
5.10А.
5.10.2.7. The number of transformers and elementary connections diagram for the SS
should be defined depending on its designation.
5.10.2.8. The uninterruptible power supply includes the 380/220 V uninterruptible power
supply aggregate with accumulator battery designated for installation in ordinary (non
explosion hazardous) premises, and for the AC switchboard.
Capacity of the uninterruptible power supply should be defined by calculation on the base
Page 64 of 295

of operating mode (load, cycling) of the electrical receivers related to the special group of the
Ist category. In the calculation the load of the emergence lighting station and adjacent tunnel
sections should be taken into consideration.
The separate accumulator batteries or uninterruptible power supply should be applied as
the reserve power supply of the Train Traffic Control units.
At the TSS the accumulator batteries for the control loops and signalization power supply
should be provided.
The accumulator batteries room should have reinforced water-proofing construction of the
floor using the acid-resisting materials.
5.10.2.9. Application of the oil-filled electrical equipment at the underground substations is
not allowed.
5.10.2.10. Location of the equipment at the substations should provide the possibility of its
replacement and transportation using the fixed-site facilities for mechanization of carrying
and lifting operations.
5.10.2.11. Laying of the transit communications (cables, pipes, air-ducts) through the
substation premises is not allowed.
5.10.2.12. At the substation and uninterruptible power supply premises the auxiliary
production facilities, as well as domestic premises should be provided according to the Table
5.10.1.
T a b l e 5.10.1
Designation of premises
Workshop
Stowage
Operative personnel premises
Maintenance personnel premises
Mess and rest rooms
Shower room
Lavatory

TSS
10
8
8
10
8
4
2

Premises area, m2
Step-down substation и
uninterruptible power
supply
10
8
8
-

At the premises the places for location of the safety engineering inventory and firefighting
equipment should be provided.
5.10.2.13. Staircases in the substation premises should have the handrails and the slope up
to 45°, width up to 0,9 m with the stair height no more than 0,15 m.
No less than two exits from the substation and uninterruptible power supply premises
should be provided: the main exit to the area out of which the free exit to the surface is
available any time, and the second one directly to the main line tunnels or to the other area.
In case the substations are located between the main line tunnels, the service exits to the
both tracks should be provided. It is allowed to accept one of the service exits having the less
dimensions.
5.10.2.14. To connect the commercial electric power consumers at the substations
according the customer assignment the additional capacity, separate power supply lines and
electric power metering devices should be provided.
5.10.3. Traction network
5.10.3.1. The contact rail location should be accepted according the clause 5.7.
5.10.3.2. Sectioning of the contact network to the non-overlapped contact rail overlap
spans (CROS) should be provided:
- at the main line tracks, in the intermediated TSS location places;
- between the main line tracks and station tracks;
- between the main line tracks and connecting tracks;
- between the connecting tracks and parking tracks of the Electric depot (near the tunnel
portals);
Page 65 of 295

- between the main line tracks.
Near the end TSS the main line tracks contact network can be provided without the
sectioning, but the network power supply diagram should be designed taking into
consideration the further line extension.
At the main line tracks the contact rail sectioning should be provided in the places where
the train moves by inertia.
Near the track switches and gates the CROS (contact rail overlap span) should be applied.
The arrangement of the CROS in other places is allowed in case of corresponding
substantiation.
5.10.3.3. At the main line tracks contact network of the intermediate station with gridiron
the following should be provided:
- from the station track (dead end) side:
а) at the track of the train departure from the station – overlapped CROS at the distance no
less than 125 m from the leave siding signal;
b) at the track of the train arrival to the station – non-overlapped CROS near the track
switch;
- from the side of connection between the main line tracks:
а) at the track of the train departure from the station to the other main line track overlapped CROS at the distance no less than 125 m from the leave siding signal;
b) at the track of the train arrival to the station - overlapped CROS at the distance from the
track switch center exceeding the train length by 35 m in perspective.
N o t e – Position of the CROS is indicated for the version of connection between the tracks where the
nearest track switch is located at the track of the train departure from the station.

At the main line track next to the temporary end station used for the train storage the
overlapped CROS should be provided.
It is allowed to apply the non-overlapped CROS in case the trains at these track sections
move by inertia.
In the cable jumpers of the CROS the electrical driven breakers should be provided.
5.10.3.4. The each section of the main line track contact network should be equipped with
power supply from two TSS by the main and reserve feeding lines.
It is allowed to install one reserve line on the side of the train departure from the station.
5.10.3.5. Feeding of the distributing points of the station track contact rails for the train
turn-around and storage with the inspection pits should be provided:
а) main feeding – by the separate power supply line from the TSS;
b) reserve feeding – by the common reserve line from the TSS and from the contact rail of
one of the main line tracks.
In case of two station tracks the distributing point for the each track should be provided.
The main power supply line is connected to the distributing point 1 using the electrical driven
breaker, the reserve one – to the distributing point 2 using the hand driven breaker.
The buses of the distributing point 1 and distributing point 2 should be interconnected. The
following breakers should be provided in the connecting line: at the distributing point 1 - hand
driven, в distributing point2 - electrical driven.
For one station track with the inspection pit one distributing point should be applied.
In the area of the inspection pit location it is allowed to install two contact 825 V posts to
provide the possibility of supply of power to the separate cars.
At the distributing point the hand driven breakers should be applied for connection of the
contact rails, contact posts, and track rails of the station section of the track with the
inspection pit, as well as for grounding of the disconnected contact rail of the track section.
The breakers of the power supply and negative boosting main should have the common hand
drive mechanically blocked with the earthing disconnector drive.
The distributing point should be located in the area next to the stop rail clear of the rolling
Page 66 of 295

stock track.
5.10.3.6. The track rails of the station section of the track with the inspection pit should be
isolated from the track rails of the connecting main line tracks. At the power supply to the
contact rail of this track the insulating joints of the track rails should be shunted
automatically.
The distributing point 1 and distributing point 2 negative boosting main breakers should be
interconnected, and connected with the main line track rails.
5.10.3.7. The tracks in the inspection pit location area should be equipped with the sound
alarm indicating the power supply to the contact rail and light alarm of the voltage
availability. The light alarm signals should be located in the inspection pit and on the wall of
the dead end.
5.10.3.8. The main and reserve feeding of the contact network of the station tracks without
the inspection pits should be executed from the main line track contact rails. In the feeding
lines the electrical driven breakers located near the main line track contact rails should be
applied.
5.10.3.9. Feeding of two line connecting track contact rail should be provided from:
а) main feeding – from the main line track contact rail, or (in case of substantiation) from
the nearest TSS of one of lines;
b) reserve feeding – from the main line track contact rail of the other line.
Connection of the main feeding should be executed using the electrical driven breaker, and
the reserve feeding – using the hand driven breaker.
The connecting track rails should be isolated from the track rails of the main line providing
the reserve feeding to the connecting track contact network. The breaker having the common
hand drive with the breaker of the contact rail reserve feeding should be provided for the
connection of track rails.
5.10.3.10. The main feeding of the connecting track contact rails of the branch leading to
the electric depot should be provided from the corresponding contact rails of the main line
track. The connection of feeding should be executed using the electrical driven breakers.
At the track length more than 700 m the main feeding should be provided from the nearest
TSS by the separate feeding line. This line should be connected to the contact rail of the each
track of the branch using the electrical driven breaker.
The reserve feeding of the contact rails of the each connecting track should be provided
from the contact rails of the storage tracks. The contact rails should be connected using the
hand driven breakers.
The connecting track rails of the branch should be isolated from the storage track rails.
They should be connected using the breaker having the common hand drive with the breaker
of the contact rail reserve feeding.
It is recommended to provide the normally removable link in the bus arrangement of the
«+825 V» breaker by the side of the Electric depot.
N o t e – The link removal provides the safety execution of works on the connecting branch, additionally to
the breakers cutoff.

5.10.3.11. The negative boosting mains and inter-track connectors of the track rails should
be connected to the center taps of the impedance bond with secondary winding.
5.10.3.12. The feeding and negative boosting mains, contact rail and track rail jumpers
should consist of no less than two cables.
5.10.3.13. The traction network cable lines should be calculated for the normal and
emergency operating modes. The emergency mode should be considered as trip of the power
supply to the contact rail from the nearest TSS.
The main feeding lines should be calculated on the normal mode load without the cable
overload, and on the emergency mode load with the cable overload.
The reserve feeding lines should be calculated on the normal mode load with cable
overload.
Page 67 of 295

The contact rail jumper cables should be calculated on the normal mode load at the
disconnection of one cable with overload of all remaining cables, and on the emergency mode
load with overload of all cables in the jumper.
The negative boosting main cables should be calculated on the normal mode load at the
disconnection of one cable with overload of all remaining cables, and on the emergency mode
load with overload of all cables in the line.
The inter-track connector cables of the track rails should meet the requirements of the
clause 5.21.
5.10.4. Electromechanical installations
5.10.4.1. Feeding of the electromechanical and other installations should be provided
directly from the substations, or from the common power mains on the base of design
category of the power supply adequacy, their location and capacity.
5.10.4.2. Feeding of the escalators should be provided directly from the TSS or SS.
The design capacity of escalators should be accepted on the base of design load for the
corresponding height of escalator according the Appendix 5.10Б and the following operating
conditions:
- for three escalators:
а) in the normal mode: two moving up, one moving down;
b) in the emergency mode – three moving up;
- for four escalators:
а) in the normal mode: two moving up, two moving down;
b) in the emergency mode: four moving up.
5.10.4.3. Feeding of the main and transit drainage plants should be provided directly from
the TSS or SS by the one power supply line. It is allowed to connect the second feeding line
to the common power main.
Feeding of the local drainage plants and firefighting boosting pumping plants should be
provided from the common power mains.
The each feeding line of the drainage plant should be calculated on the simultaneous
operation of the two pumps in the main plant, and one pump in transit and local plants in the
normal mode, and simultaneous operation of all pumps in the emergency mode.
The each feeding line of the firefighting plant should be calculated on the operation of one
pump.
Supply of power by the two simultaneously connected feeding lines should be provided for
the drainage plants with two or more pumps.
One working and one reserve feeding lines should be provided for the local drainage plants
with one fixed-site pump and for the firefighting plant.
5.10.4.4. Feeding of the tunnel ventilation installation with two ventilators should be
provided directly from the TSS or SS by the two working lines.
The each feeding line of the tunnel ventilation installation should be calculated on the
operation of one ventilator in the normal mode, and two ventilators in the emergency mode.
The calculation on the emergency mode should be executed at the operation of the given
tunnel ventilation installation in the fire safety system.
5.10.4.5. Feeding of the separate near-tunnel installations and portable aggregates with the
total capacity up to 60 KW located in the main line tunnels should be provided from the
common power mains. The line boxes containing the automated breakers and plug-and-socket
units should be applied for the connection to the power mains.
The line boxes should be installed:
- under the station platform in the ventilation-and-cable duct;
- in the main line tunnels:
а) near the station platform;
b) near the track switches;
Page 68 of 295

c) near the main and transit drainage plants;
d) in every 100 m (no more) between the mentioned above locations.
The distance between the end line boxes in the area of the power mains current distribution
between the adjacent substations should be no more than 15 m.
5.10.4.6. At the application of the electrical heating cables in the staircases heating system
according to the clause 5.8.3 the technical opportunity for the cable maintenance and
replacement without execution of construction works should be provided.
5.10.4.7. To feed the maintenance mechanisms with the capacity up to 20 KW the line
boxes connecting to the nearest 380/220 V distribution points should be provided in the
vestibules, in the machine and tension rooms of escalators, in the machine premises and
ventilation cabinets of tunnel ventilation installations, in the drainage plants, and in the
sewerage and water-intake installations.
5.10.4.8. The 220 V feeding of the separate installations – heating electrical devices, air
conditioners, special clothes drying cabinets, maintenance and cleaning mechanisms, etc,
should be provided, as a rule, from the 380/220 V distribution network using, where
appropriate, the reducing transformers and Emergency Circuit Breakers.
N o t e - Application of the Emergency Circuit Breakers should meet the requirements of the PUE.

The automated breakers should be applied for the connection of stationary electrical
receivers, plug-and-socket units with protected contacts should be applied for the connection
of portable maintenance and cleaning mechanisms.
The plug-and-socket units should be provided in the machine and traction rooms of
escalators, in the production premises, in the passenger premises of the station in every 25 m.
The number of poles in the plug-and-socket units should be defined depending on the type of
connected equipment.
5.10.5. Lighting
5.10.5.1. The working and emergency lighting of the premises should be provided taking
into consideration the SNiP 23-05 and PUE, on the base of functional, aesthetic, architecturaland-art, and operating conditions.
5.10.5.2. In the passenger premises of the stations the common balanced or localized
working lighting executed by the lamps with low and high pressure gas-discharge light
sources. It is allowed to apply the incandescent lamps at the execution of lighting on the base
of architectural-and-art requirements.
The lighting installation elements according the light distribution class can be the elements
of direct (P), semidirect (N), balanced (R), semiindirect (V) and indirect (О) illumination.
5.10.5.3. In the passenger premises of the stations and main line tunnels the standard
values of horizontal illuminance should be accepted by the Table 5.10.2.
The allowable deviation of the horizontal illuminance from the standard should be equal no
more than -10 - +20 %.
The calculation of the lighting installation in the passenger premises of the stations should
be executed according to the Appendix 5.10В.
T a b l e 5.10.2
Premises

Illuminance normalization
plane

Horizontal
illuminance, lux

Station:
Middle and platform halls
Ticket hall
Area in front of escalator
Escalator combplates and staircases
Corridors between stations
Entrance corridors and under-street crossings
Main line, dead end, connecting tunnel
25 m length section of tunnel before and after the station
platform

Floor level
Floor level
»
Combplate or stair level
Floor level
Floor level
Rail head level
Rail head level

200
200
100
100
100
75
20
60

Page 69 of 295

Premises

Illuminance normalization
plane

Horizontal
illuminance, lux

The pre-portal tunnel section of the length, m:
5
Rail head level
1000
от 5 до 25
Rail head level
750
» 25 » 50
»
500
» 50 » 75
»
300
» 75 » 100
»
150
» 100 » 125
»
60
» 125 » 150
»
20
Switch blades of the track switches
»
20
Service platform in the dead end tunnel
Platform
30
Notes
1. The illuminance value is given for the gas-discharge light sources. In case of incandescent lamps
application the illuminance standard should be decreased by one step of the illuminance scale according to the
clause 4.1 of the СНиП 23-05.
2. The illuminance depreciation and variation factors for the passenger premises of the stations should be
accepted according to the Recommendations [10].

5.10.5.4. In the lighting installations of the passenger premises the average value of the
discomfort index should be no more than 20 with the allowable exceeding up to 20 %.
In case of the special architectural-and-art requirements the average value of cylindrical
illuminance should be accepted to be 75 lux with the allowable deviation no more than -10 +20 %.
5.10.5.5. The illuminance of the production, administrative, medical, domestic, and other
premises should be accepted in accordance with КСЦ Metro-2.
5.10.5.6. The emergency (evacuation) lighting should be provided in the passenger,
production, and domestic premises of stations, and in the tunnels and near-tunnel installations.
The illuminance in the passenger premises and tunnels should compile 5 % of the standard
value accepted for the working lighting, but no less than 2 lux in the passenger premises and
0,5 lux in the tunnels.
5.10.5.7. The lighting of the platform and middle halls of the stations should be executed
using the lamps located in the arch cornice, coffers of ceiling, as well as it can be open using
the diffusers preventing the train drivers blinding.
As a rule, the factory manufactured 220 and 380 VAC lamps with decreased level noise
should be applied.
It is allowed to apply individually manufactures lamps meeting the requirements of NPB
249 and GOST 15150. In the working documentation the technical characteristics and
maintenance instructions of such lamps should be indicated.
The lamps should be located at the places accessible for maintenance; it is not allowed to
locate them over the escalators and staircases, over the track rails, and at the height more than
5 m.
The suspended lamps (lusters) with one fastening unit should be equipped with fall
protection and lowering facilities.
The inventory (dismountable, folding) staircases and towers should be provided for the
lamp maintenance.
5.10.5.8. To illuminate the area under the station platform edge the separate group of the
working lighting should be provided with location of the lamps in every 6 m.
5.10.5.9. In the main line, connecting and dead end tunnels the luminescent lamps should
be applied for the working and emergency lighting.
The voltage of the lamps in the working and emergency modes should be no less than
90%, and no more than 105 % of the rated value.
5.10.5.10. The working lighting of the stations and main line tunnels should not deteriorate
the visibility of the signal lights.
5.10.5.11. The light indicators at the evacuation ways should be connected to the
Page 70 of 295

emergency lighting network according to the clause 5.16.
At the entrances to the connecting cross-passages the light indicators «Emergency exit to
the 1 (2) track», and at the exit from the cross-passage - the light indicators of moving toward
the stations with their names and distances to them should be provided.
The light indicators «Emergency exit to the 1 (2) track» should be connected to the
emergency lighting network of the 2 (1) track.
5.10.5.12. In the single-line tunnel the working lighting groups should be located on the
both sides, the emergency lighting group – on the high-current side of the tunnel; in the
double-line tunnel the working and emergency lighting groups – on the both sides of the
tunnel.
5.10.5.13. In the dead ends the common and local lighting of the station track inspection
pits should be provided.
The common lighting should be executed using the 220 V lamps with their checkered
alternate installation in every 5 m on the both sides of the pit. The lamps should be equipped
with protective net and with the structure preventing the access to the lamp without
application of the tool; the local lighting should be executed using the portable 12 V lamps.
The sockets for their connection should be located by the one side of the pit in every 20 m.
The additional luminescent lamp lighting should be provided on the both sides of the pits
at the height of 1100 mm in the area of the hand-trucks and car automatic couplers location.
In the dead ends without the station track inspection pits the sockets for portable 12 V
lamps should be located at the rolling stock storage places on the walls in every 20 m.
The plugs of the 12 V electrical receivers should not match to the 220 V sockets.
5.10.5.14. The feeding of the working lighting groups of the main line, dead end, and
connecting tunnels should be provided from the TSS or SS by the two cable lines, and the
feeding of the emergency lighting groups – by the one cable line.
5.10.5.15. The intensified lighting in the main line tunnels before the station platforms and
the tunnel portals should be provided according to the Table 5.10.2. The separate power
supply lines and automated control should be provided for the intensified lighting groups.
5.10.5.16. In the main line and connecting tunnels the separate 380/220 V feeding line with
automated breakers and plug-and-socket units in the boxes for connection of the hand
electrical tools of up to 5 кВт capacity and portable lamps providing the intensified local
lighting should be provided. The boxes with two-and three-pole plug-and-socket units with
protected contacts should be located in the single-line tunnel on the low-current side of the
tunnel, and in the double-line tunnel – checkered alternate on the both sides of the tunnel at
the intervals no more than 50 m.
The boxes with 220/12V reducing transformer and plug-and-socket unit should also be
connected to this line. The boxes should be installed at the places of the Train Traffic Control
Devices, track switches and gates location.
The allowable loss of voltage in the power supply line at the simultaneous connection of
two loads with total capacity of 10KW compiles 9 %.
In the dead ends the boxes with reducing transformers and plug-and-socket units should be
connected to the working lighting groups.
5.10.5.17. For illumination of the switch blades of the track switches the separate
emergency lighting group should be provided.
5.10.5.18. The feeding of the 220V loads having the capacity up to 100W in the
communication cabinets located at the stations and in the dead ends should be provided from
the working lighting networks.
In the tunnels and near-tunnel structures, near the communication cabinets the two-pole
220V socket with protected contact should be provided.
5.10.5.19. In the near-tunnel structures the feeding of the working lighting network should
be provided from the local 380/220V distributing point, to the emergency lighting network –
Page 71 of 295

from the emergency lighting groups of the main line tunnels.
5.10.5.20. In the lighting networks of the near-tunnel structures having the entrances from
the tunnels and from the ground surface, the lamp switches should be located near each
entrance
5.10.5.21. The sockets for connection of the 12V portable lamps should be provided in the
production premises, in the passages between escalators in every 20 m, near the water
collectors, and sewage tanks of the pumping plants.
In the ends of the station platforms, and in the middle of the station platforms with gridiron
the sockets for the covering lamps, and special plug-and-socket units should be provided
according to the clause 5.16.7.
In the under-street crossings near the staircases the two-pole 220V sockets should be
provided.
5.10.5.22. At the entrances to the station vestibules and to the ticket halls the electrical
rings with installation of buttons outside the entrances should be provided.
5.10.5.23. In the passenger premises of the stations the concealed wiring should be
provided in the thin-walled metal tubes; it is allowed to execute open cabling in the cornices.
In the production, domestic, and other premises of the stations, in the tunnels and neartunnel structures, in the cable tunnels and under the station platforms the open cabling should
be provided; in the inspection pits of the station tracks the wiring in the thin-walled metal
tubes should be provided.
5.10.5.24. Cabling of the working and emergency lighting in the premises should be
provided by the separate routes.
5.10.6. Cable network
5.10.6.1. In the tunnels, near-tunnel structures, ventilation-and-cable ducts, compartments,
and in the cable tunnels of the stations, in the power mains, as well as in the distributing
networks of the near-tunnel structures the armored cables should be applied, in the production
and other premises of the stations – non-armored cables should be applied according to the
Manual - Appendix 5А.
5.10.6.2. Cabling in all premises and structures, except for the passenger premises, should
be open, without any fencings and partitions.
5.10.6.3. The minimum distances between the hangers and between the cables, as well as
dimensions of the cable rooms should be accepted by the Table 5.10.3.
T a b l e 5.10.3
Parameter

Size, mm
By vertical
By horizontal

Distance:
between the hanger ears
125
between the racks
150
between the hangers
1000 - 1200
800 - 1100
Height of the ventilation-and-cable duct under the station platform in the
1800
passage area and in the area of cabling
Height of the cable floor at the substation
1800
Distance in the clear between cables:
power cables up to 3KV
60
15
power cables up to 10KV
100*
Note 2
power cables up to 3KV and 10KV
100*
Note 2
power cables up to 1KV and control cables
60
15
Power and communication or control cables:
а) communication or control cables over the 3 – 10KV cables
500
b) power cables up to 1KV over the 3 – 10KV cables
100
c) communication or control cables under the 10KV cables
100
d) crossing of communication or control cables with cables up to 1KV
15
15
e) crossing of communication or control cables with 3 – 10KV cables
Note 3
Notes
1. In case of checkered alternate location of cables on the hanger the size marked as «*» should be equal no
Page 72 of 295

Parameter

Size, mm
By vertical
By horizontal

less than 80 mm.
2. The size by horizontal should be no less than the cable diameter.
3. The one group cables should be laid in the tubes, or separated by the inflammable partition.

5.10.6.4. In the single-line main line tunnels the power and control cables should be
located on the high-current side of the tunnel, the train traffic control units and
communication cables - on the low-current side of the tunnel.
The separate train traffic control units and communication cables laying on the highcurrent side is allowed, as a rule, below the power cables, and power cabling on the lowcurrent side of the tunnel, as a rule, above the communication cables.
The 825V contact network jumper cabling and 825V negative boosting main cabling on
the both sides of the tunnel should be executed on the additional hangers installed below the
main cable hanger.
5.10.6.5. The cables depending on the voltage and designation should be located in the
following consequence (from top downward):
- high-current side: 10KV; 825V; 380/220V cables; control; power main (line box cables);
- low-current side: communication cables and wires; train traffic control and
communication signal-locking and control cables.
In the double-line tunnel the combined cabling on the both sides of the tunnel is allowed
meeting the mentioned above requirements.
5.10.6.6. On the one 65 mm diameter hanger ear it is allowed:
- laying of two communication, signal-locking, control, or two power cables up to 1KV at
the diameter of the each cable no more than 30 mm;
- laying of three трех communication, signal-locking, control cables at the diameter of the
each cable no more than 20 mm.
Combined power, communication, or signal-locking cabling on the one hanger ear is not
allowed.
Within the one run the each cable on the cable hangers should, as a rule, be laid on the one
and the same level defined by the most loaded area.
5.10.6.7. The cables should pass the wall openings and cross the tunnel from one side to
another on the special structures or hangers located in every 1 m, and should be fastened by
brackets.
Cabling under the main line tracks is not allowed.
5.10.6.8. In the ventilation-and-cable compartment of the escalator tunnel the cabling
should be provided with fastening by brackets to the each fifth hanger.
The transit cabling in the cable ducts of the machine rooms of escalators is not allowed.
In the shafts the cabling should be provided in the central area of the shaft cross-section on
the metal structures with platforms in every 3 m and staircases between them. Fastening of
cables should be executed by brackets to the each hanger.
5.10.6.9. At the places of the piped trunk line conduit route direction change as well as in
every 60 m at its straight sections the cable manholes or cross-connecting terminals should be
placed; the pipes between the cable manholes or cross-connecting terminals should have oneway slope no less than 3 ‰.
5.10.6.10. The inter-reserving cabling should be provided in the different main line
tunnels.
The inter-reserving cabling at the stations and in the premises should be provided by the
different routes. If it is necessary to lay such cables by the common route they should be
separated by asbestos-cement partitions.
5.10.6.11. At the places of crossing of temperature joints of bridges, at the places of
transfer from the bridge structures to the overhead roads, as well as at the above-ground
sections in the galleries the cabling should be provided with excess length enough for
Page 73 of 295

compensation of possible displacements.
5.10.6.12. At the 10KV cable coupling sleeves the special fire-proof metal cases should be
installed. The limits of the 10KV cable coupling sleeves location should be accepted
according to the clause 5.16.7.
5.10.6.13. Cabling through the walls and partitions of the structures should be provided in
the pipes sealed with inflammable material.
5.10.6.14. Measures on the electrical corrosion prevention should be taken according to the
clause 5.21.
5.10.6.15. In the main line tunnels and other structures with concrete and reinforced
concrete linings the each cable hanger grounding should be provided.
5.10.6.16. Fastening of the cable hangers, earthing conductors, and other metal structures
to the reinforced concrete linings of the tunnels should be provided with application of
dismountable joints (rawplug anchors).
5.11. Electrical installation control
5.11.1. At the TSS and SS the following should be provided:
- Local element-by-element control of objects; light alarm of the controlled object
positions, light and sound alarm of their emergency shutdown, automated control of
availability of voltage in the operating current circuits;
- Local automated control of objects;
- 10KV network breakers cutoff due to the acting of protection, and lockout preventing
closing according to the safety conditions;
- Automated electric power counting at the 10KV line inputs and outputs, at the converting
units and transformers, with location of the central station system at the Line Dispatcher
Point.
In addition, the following should be provided at the SS:
- Local element-by-element control of the 10KV and 825V breakers, 825V feeding line
disconnectors, earthing disconnectors at the 825V switchboard;
- Control of availability of voltage in the buses of the 825V switchboard;
- Converting unit cutoffs at the earth-faults in them and in connected to them 825V cables;
- 825V feeding line cutoff at the earth-fault in the cable;
- 825V feeding lines and converting units cutoff at the earth-fault in the 825V switchboard;
- Single repeated closing of the 825V feeding lines after their cutoff due to the overload or
short circuit conditions in the contact network;
- 825V feeding lines cutoff at the emergency cutoff of the adjacent SS feeding lines
blocked with them (depending on the accepted traction network scheme);
5.11.2. At the TSS, SS, and at the traction network the following should be provided from
the Line Dispatcher Point:
- telecontrol of:
а) all 10KV breakers;
b) 825V breakers and earthing disconnectors at the 825V switchboard of the SS, as well as
electrical driven disconnectors in the contact network;
c) Program control of the converting units, breakers and disconnectors of the 825V feeding
lines, earthing disconnectors at the 825V switchboard;
- tele-signalization of the telecontrolled object positions and disturbance of the normal
operating mode of the substation. It is allowed to integrate the telesignals required the
identical actions of the dispatcher;
- tele-measurement of:
а) voltage in the bus sections of the 10KV switchboard and at the AC and DC switchboards
with voltage up to 1KV;
b) current load of the 10KV feeding lines;
c) current load of converting units, main and reserve 825V feeding lines;
Page 74 of 295

d) data from microprocessor safety devices of the 10KV and 825V feeding (according to
their implementation);
- Automated control of the power consumption by the transformers, converting units,
10KV power supply. In correspondence with the task it is allowed to provide the information
about the power consumption control at the Underground Railroad chief power engineers’
working places and electrical supply services as well.
5.11.3. In the uninterruptable power supply unit the following should be provided:
- automatic changeover 380/220V of the switchboard to the feeding from the
uninterruptable power supply unit in case of failure of the feeding from the SS;
- telemetric control of operative condition of the equipment, dump of voltage in the
switchboard buses, emergency changeover.
5.11.4. In the 825V traction network of the stations with gridiron the remote control of the
following items should be provided from the Station Dispatcher Point:
- disconnectors of the cable jumpers between the contact rail sections, and dead end contact
network reserve power supply lines from the main line track contact rail;
- sectional switches between Distributing Point 1 and Distributing Point 2 of the dead ends;
- switching unit in the electrical drive power supply circuits of these disconnectors and
switches.
5.11.5. In the ventilation and pumping plants the following should be provided:
- local element-by-element control of the objects, light alarm of the tunnel ventilation
installation ventilators’ position, valves and shut-off valves; voltmeter control of the voltage
availability in the feeding network of the pumping plants and ventilators of tunnel ventilation
installation;
- local automated control of the objects:
а) in the pumping plants, in the warm air curtains, air curtains and local ventilation
installations at the station and substation depending on the settled parameters (fluid level in
the collectors, water and air temperatures);
b) local ventilation installations cutoff at the stations and substations, closing of
pressurized valves of local ventilation installations of the fuel and lubricating materials
storage rooms in case of actuation of the Automatic Fire Alarm Installation;
- remote control of the following objects from the Station Dispatcher Point:
а) local ventilation installations of stations and near-tunnel structures;
b) booster pumps of the ground water wells;
- remote startup of the firefighting booster pumps at the water pipeline and opening of
shut-off valves of the bypass line of the water metering unit using the button posts near the
fire cock boxes at the shallow stations and in the vestibules of the deep burial stations;
- remote control of the following items from the Station Dispatcher Point and telecontrol
from the Line Dispatcher Point:
а) aggregates of the tunnel ventilation installation, warm air curtains and air curtains;
b) firefighting booster pumps and shut-off valves at the water pipeline;
c) submersible pumps and shut-off valves of the ground water wells;
- remote signalization to the Station Dispatcher Point and tele-signalization to the Line
Dispatcher Point of:
а) positions of the remote and tele-controlled objects;
b) active mode of the pumps, failure of drainage plants and alarm level of fluid in them, as
well as in the sewerage installations at the station and in the technical maintenance points of
the dead ends;
c) ground short circuit and dump of voltage in the remote control and remote signalization
circuits;
d) actuation of the Automatic Fire Alarm Installation and Automatic Firefighting
Installation at the station and exceeding the allowable air temperature limits in the machine
Page 75 of 295

rooms of substations and escalators.
5.11.6. The escalator installations alarm and control, including the automatic changeover of
380V feeding lines in the machine room of escalators, as well as requirements on the escalator
control from the Station Dispatcher Point and Line Dispatcher Point should be accepted in
correspondence with the electro-technical tasks of the escalator manufacturing enterprise.
5.11.7. In the networks lighting stations and main line tunnels should be provided:
- local individual control of lighting groups of the stations and main line tunnels;
- remote control from the Station Dispatcher Point of:
а) lighting groups of the passenger premises of stations;
b) lighting groups of the under-platform ventilation-and-cable ducts, contact rail area under
the entrance roof overhang of the station platform, as well as the main line tunnels;
c) centralized disconnection of the working lighting groups of the main line tunnels (for
emission of the light signals);
d) electrical heating networks of staircases to the under-street crossings or to the corridors
at the entrances to the underground station vestibules;
- automated control of the intensified lighting groups of the main line tunnels in front of
the station platforms and tunnel portals at the train arrival;
- automated control (depending on the illuminance level in the day time) of the lighting
groups of the «М» symbols and entrance roof overhangs over the staircases to the
underground vestibules.
5.11.8. In the passenger premises, in the premises with continuous residence of personnel,
at the escalators and staircases of the stations the automatic activation of the emergency
lighting groups in case of disconnection of the corresponding groups of the working lighting
should be provided. In the other premises, as well as in the main line tunnels, dead ends and
technical maintenance points the manual activation of the emergency lighting should be
provided.
5.11.9. At the line the tele-metering and telecontrol systems should be provided according
to the clauses 5.8.1.1; 5.8.2; 5.9.1; 5.9.2; 5.9.3 with transmission of signal to the Line
Dispatcher Point.
5.11.10. It is allowed to accept the volume of the remote and telecontrol and signalization
of the installations’ operation in correspondence with approved in the established order
control charts of aggregates and devices included in these installations.
5.11.11. Switching from the one control type to another should be provided from the local
control posts individually for the each controlled object.
At the control switch the status of the controlled objects, as well as the statuses of safety
devices and locking should be saved.
5.11.12. Telecontrol system channels should be provided preferably in the communication
cables taking into consideration the perspective development of the line.
5.12. Train traffic control
5.12.1. The train traffic control installations should meet the requirements of the
Regulations [9] and Instructions [8].
5.12.2. The maximum traffic capacity of the line should be calculated by the parameters of
the train traffic interval regulation and safety system only. At the realization of maximum
design schedule of the traffic, the train traffic interval regulation and safety system should
provide the continuous control of the observance of allowable traffic speed, automatic
deceleration in case the train exceeds this speed, and stop of the train in case the driver does
not take measures for the speed reduction.
The train traffic interval regulation and safety system should be provided on the principals
of automated regulation of the speed by means of formation and transmission of the
Automated Speed Regulation code signals (frequency, digital, etc) by the communication
channels to the train devices regarding the allowable train speed at the given track section and
Page 76 of 295

at the next section in the train traffic direction.
The track rails, floor sensors, and leaky (slotted) cable can be used as the communication
channels.
The train traffic interval regulation and safety system should consist of the stationary and
train equipment subsets.
N o t e – The train subsets are included in the composition of the car equipment and are supplied together
with the rolling stock.

The train traffic interval regulation and safety system should be provided at the all main
line tracks and connecting tracks between the lines.
At the track sections with bidirectional traffic the train traffic interval regulation and safety
system should be provided for the each traffic direction.
5.12.3. At the calculation of the traffic capacity of the line the time reserve for sensing of
the Automated Speed Regulation code signal permitting the train traffic should be taken into
consideration: on the main line - no less than 15 s; at the approach to station and station tracks
– no less than 5 s.
If necessary, the main line and station tracks can be equipped with the outboard speed
control.
5.12.4. At the double-line connecting branches to the Electric depot, where the each track
is designated mainly for the unidirectional traffic, it is allowed not to provide the automated
locking (AL) devices for locking of the opposite direction train traffic.
5.12.5. The automated locking devices, except for the semi-automated action traffic lights,
should be normally open. Activation of the automated locking of separate sections should be
provided from the Station Dispatcher Point, locking of separate sections and of the whole line
– from the Line Dispatcher Point.
5.12.6. In the tunnels the «Metro» type traffic lights and at the open line sections the
typical railroad traffic lights should be provided.
The bifilar lamps or LEDs should be installed in the traffic lights.
The traffic lights at the main line tracks should be marked with odd numbers for the first
track, and with the even numbers for the second track.
The traffic light number consists of the run number (one or two first figures) and sequential
number of the traffic light at the run (last figure).
The semi-automated action traffic lights should have two characters showing the station
name in abbreviated form before the number. The shunting traffic lights can be marked with
one character only.
5.12.7. The two-figure automated action traffic lights should be provided at the exit from
the station only; they should be normally open.
The semi-automated action traffic lights should have two operating modes: at the open and
closed automated locking.
5.12.8. The traffic light installation should be provided, as a rule, on the right side in the
traffic direction. In the single-line tunnels and at the poor visibility places it is allowed to
install the traffic lights on the left side.
5.12.9. At the semi-automated action traffic lights should have (except for the traffic lights
permitting the traffic on the main line tracks in the wrong direction) the calling-on signals
should be provided. The electrical diagrams of the calling-on signals should provide the
continuous control of intactness of the circuit wires and calling-on signal light sources, and
control of position of railway points in the train traffic direction.
5.12.10. At the traffic lights permitting the traffic in the multiple directions, including the
traffic on the calling-on signal, the route indicators should be provided.
5.12.11. At the line tracks the double-rail track circuits should be provided without the
insulating joints and with the insulating joints.
The single-rail track circuits at the scissors crossings are allowed.
The rail circuits should be protected:
Page 77 of 295

- from the mutual effect of the adjacent rail circuits at the closing of insulating joints
between them;
- from the effect of the traction current in the rails, and ground currents;
- from the effect of the rail circuit imposition currents used in the other schemes.
5.12.12. The each rail circuit should have no less than two traction current inputs, and
should be used for the control of the track rail intactness as well.
The each undivided rail circuit with insulating joints should include no less than two
impedance bonds with secondary winding to pass the traction current. In the divided rail
circuits it is allowed to install three impedance bonds with secondary winding.
In the single-rail track circuits the track rail nearest to the contact rail should be used to
pass the traction current.
5.12.13. Connections of the different designation (traction current negative boosting, intertrack connectors) wires and cables to the track rail at the double-rail track circuits should be
executed through the middle output of the impedance bond with secondary winding no closer
than in every two insulating joints, or three rail circuits. In this case the parameters of the
bypass circuit on the parallel and adjacent rail circuits should not be less than the ones
indicated in the Table 5.12.1. At the more close location of the inter-rack connectors the
inductive reactance no less than 2 Ohm at the frequency of 50 Hz should be included in their
circuits.
5.12.14. The electrical centralization devices include the all railway points of the station
with gridiron.
The electrical centralization should be correlated with the train traffic interval regulation
and safety system devices.
It is allowed to apply the Automated Working Place (AWP) of the station dispatcher at the
Station Dispatcher Point and Automated Working Place of the train traffic control electrician
in the computer-based equipment room instead of the display console and control panel of the
electrical centralization, correspondingly.
5.12.15. The Automated Speed Regulation code channel permitting the traffic on the route
within the station with gridiron should be activated after the setting and locking of the route
together with permissive indication of the traffic light.
The Automated Speed Regulation code signal of absolute stop should be transmitted to the
rail circuit in front of the semi-automated action traffic light at the unsettled route.
The route should be released after the train leaves the whole route (or part of the route in
case of its sectional release). The route release circuit should act both in the time of train
traffic and in the time of moving of single running unit on this route.
The route not used by the train should be released in case there are no trains at the preroute section.
It is allowed to provide the emergency route release by fixed button with display console
(or АWP) of the Station Dispatcher Point and Line Dispatcher Point at the closed traffic light
and absence of the permissive signal from the Automated Speed Regulation only.
5.12.16. In the train traffic control installations the redundancy of separate circuit nodes of
the Automated Speed Regulation code signal formation and railway points control circuits, as
well as possibility of the railway points control circuit switching to the mockup should be
provided.
The railway points control circuit should provide:
- possibility of switch of the track locked in the route and at the occupied point section;
- continuous control of the switch point blade positions;
- bringing of the switch point blades to the end positions in case of rolling stock run-over
to the point section in the time of starting track switch;
- Preventing the track switch and false control at the wires fault, grounding, and
penetration of current from unauthorized power supply source, including the spontaneous
Page 78 of 295

switch of track under rolling stock;
- control of the point splitting with record of signal about splitting;
- possibility of the track switch using the separate button with record of this action;
- possibility of the point circuit disconnection.
5.12.17. The frequent routes at the stations should have the possibility of changeover to the
automated operation. In this case the calling-on signals of the main line traffic lights should
be switched together with these traffic lights changeover to automated operation.
T a b l e 5.12.1
Lрц, m
100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375
Lобх, m 540 560 580 600 615 640 670 700 720 760 790 820
Lтп, m
320 340 370 390 410 430 460 490 510 540 570 600
Zобх, Ohm 1,0 1,1 1,15 1,2 1,22 1,3 1,33 1,4 1,45 1,5 1,6 1,65
Lрц - length of the longest rail circuit;
Lобх – minimum allowable length of the bypass circuit;
Lтп - distance between the points of connection of the inter-track connectors;
Zобх - minimum allowable resistance of the bypass circuit.

400 425 450 475
850 900 930 975
630 660 690 730
1,7 1,8 1,85 1,95

500
1000
750
2,0

5.12.18. The simultaneous Centralized Dispatching Control of the railway points and
signals from the Line Dispatcher Point and Station Dispatcher Point is not allowed.
Selection of the control mode should be provided from the Station Dispatcher Point by the
direction of the Line Dispatcher Point.
In case of the circuit integrity damage occurring between the Station Dispatcher Point and
Line Dispatcher Point facilities the open calling-on signals should be automatically switched
off.
5.12.19. The Centralized Dispatching Control systems should be protected from the
unauthorized access – control of the objects can be executed only after entering the personal
code of the dispatcher recognized by the system.
5.12.20. The train traffic control systems on the line should be equipped with the following
facilities:
- automated reading (transfer) of the train route numbers;
- check points of the technical conditions of rolling stock during the train traffic with their
location at the each line track;
- control of passage to the tunnel.
These facilities should be correlated with the circuits of the train traffic interval regulation
and safety system and Electric Centralized Control.
The records of emergency situations registered by the devices should be automatically
transferred to the Station Dispatcher Point and Line Dispatcher Point.
5.12.21. The train traffic control facilities should be correlated with the time interval
indicators and track gates.
5.12.22. The equipment of the installations should be located at the Line Dispatcher Point
and, as a rule, at the each station.
The trackside assets should be located in the tunnel: traffic lights, line boxes, impedance
bonds with secondary windings, point operating gears, line sensors, crank devices, and, where
appropriate, relay cabinets with instruments.
5.12.23. The 220VAC feeding of the rail circuits, traffic lights, calling-on signals and point
operating gears, and 24V feeding of the direct current relays located in the equipment room
from accumulator batteries or from the uninterruptable power supply units should be
provided.
Feeding from accumulator batteries or from the uninterruptable power supply units to the
DC devices located outside the equipment room of the given station is not allowed.
The DC feeding from the separate rectifier units to the track repeaters located in the
equipment rooms of adjacent stations, equipment installed in the tunnels and other premises
should be provided. It is allowed to use the AC in these purposes.
Page 79 of 295

5.12.24. The reserve feeding of the calling-on signals, point detection relay, crank devices,
as well as to the control indicators of these circuits at the Electric Centralized Control panel in
the Station Dispatcher Point should be provided from the separate transducers connected to
accumulator batteries or to the uninterruptable power supply units.
5.12.25. The main distribution panels should be installed in the equipment rooms and
should provide the following:
- connection of three AC feeding lines or two AC feeding lines and uninterruptable power
supply unit;
- distribution of the power supply by the loads;
- automated and manual switch of feeding lines:
- light and sound alarm of dump of voltage in the feeding lines;
- power supply lines voltage and current metering;
- connection of accumulator batteries by the buffer circuit, and its charging;
- reserve feeding of the separate circuits.
5.12.26. In the networks going beyond the equipment rooms the two-pole disconnection of
the each circuit should be provided.
5.12.27. The special switchboard located in the separate room near the equipment room
should be provided to disconnect the all kinds of power supply.
At the installation of the main distribution panels in separate switch room it is allowed not
to apply the power supply disconnection switchboard.
5.12.28. The cable according to the Appendix 5А should be applied in the train traffic
control facilities.
5.12.29. The circuits of the electric switch mechanisms, traffic lights, feeding and relay
ends of the rail circuits should be provided in different cables. It is allowed to combine in one
cable circuits of different designation, except for the take-up circuits of the track relays and
point control circuits.
5.12.30. For the train traffic control devices the separate cable lines should be provided for
the each track. It is allowed to combine in one cable auxiliary circuits related to different
tracks.
In the cable line one free cable pair with output to the each signal point should be provided
for execution of regulation and, where appropriate, for reserve using.
5.12.31. In the signal-and-locking cables the reserve conductors should be provided – no
less than 10 % of their total number, but no less than two conductors.
5.12.32. At the stations the premises for allocation of the train traffic control facilities
should be provided: equipment, switch, and accumulator rooms with portal. In case of use of
the uninterruptable power supply unit the accumulator rooms are not necessary.
At the station with gridiron the panels of Automated Working Place or Electric Centralized
Control should be located in the premises of the Station Dispatcher Point, the lockout
switches of the track gates – in the passage-through premises of the Station Dispatcher Point.
The indicated premises should be located at the platform level on the side of the gridiron, or
in the production premises block.
The control display console (information display facilities) should be provided in the
equipment room with indication of train positions and serviceable conditions of the main
devices and circuits.
5.12.33. Near each signal point and point operating gear the sockets for connection of the
train traffic control communication devices should be provided.
5.12.34. The metal structures and equipment enclosures grounding should be provided to
the common protective earthing system for the line electrical installations, except for the
enclosures of the impedance bonds with secondary winding and point operating gears.
5.13. Communication
5.13.1. The list of subscribers to be equipped with the line and station OperativePage 80 of 295

Technological Communication (OTC) facilities is represented in the Appendix 5.13А.
According the design assignment the following line OTC can be provided additionally:
- conference communication for the management, services, and distances of the
Underground Railroad;
- tele-monitoring with transmission of pictures from the stations to the Line Dispatcher
Point.
All types of dispatcher and service communication should be organized by the group
principal.
5.13.2. The dispatcher communication control panels should be installed at the working
places of corresponding dispatchers, the service communication control panels – in the
equipment and relay rooms, subscriber and terminal blocks – according the Appendix 5.13А.
5.13.3. The composition of the line and station ОТС should include the communication
types according to the Table 5.13.1.
T a b l e 5.13.1
ОТС
1. Line
1.1. Dispatcher:
Train traffic
Power supply
Escalator
Electromechanical
Police
Fire safety
1.2. Train radio
1.3. Tunnel
1.4. Operative
1.5. Telephone general usage
1.6. Audio Recording of Dispatcher Negotiations
1.7. Inter-dispatcher
1.8. Inter-dispatcher PSDC with the City power supply Dispatcher Point
1.9. Service:
Between the dispatcher and line train traffic telecontrol devices
The same for the power supply
» escalators
» electromechanical installations
2. Station
2.1. Station
2.2. Train traffic control
2.3. Escalator
2.4. Station master
2.5. Local
2.6. Public address system
2.7. Loudspeaker
2.8. Tele-monitoring
2.9. Electric clock
2.10. City
2.11. City radio broadcasting net
2.12. Warning Signalization
2.13. Repair-operative radio

Designation

TTDC
PSDC
EDC
EMDC
PC
ESC
TRC
Т
О
АТС
ARDC
IDC
IDEC
TTTC
PSTC
ETC
EMTC
S
TTC
ES
M
L
PAS
LSC
TO
EC
CTC
CRN
WS
RORC

5.13.4. The TRC radio stations should be installed: regulatory – in the Traffic Dispatcher
Point (TDP), stationary – at the station, locomotive – in the train driver cabs.
The TRC between the regulatory and stationary radio stations should be organized by the
wired channel, between the stationary and locomotive radio stations – by the radio channel.
The leaky feeders should be applied, as a rule, as the guide lines (antennas) for the radio
channel.
N o t e – The locomotive radio stations and their antennas are included in the car equipment set and are
Page 81 of 295

supplied together with rolling stock.

5.13.5. The T communication equipment should provide:
- the calls reception and notification sent to the Traffic Dispatcher Point control panel;
- connection of the tunnel communication line to the dispatcher communication line.
Near the telephones in the tunnel the ATC telephone sockets should be provided.
5.13.6. The IDC lines should provide connection by the managing dispatcher of his
selective communication channel to the other dispatcher channel.
5.13.7. The O Communication should be provided in case of availability no less than three
lines in the Underground Railroad network.
5.13.8. The ATC networks of the Underground Railroad should be provided for
organization of the general usage telephone communication. The number of АТС, their
capacity, location, and correlation should be defined during the designing.
The distribution of the ATC telephones should be accepted according to the Appendix
5.13А and additional inventory list of customer.
5.13.9. The mobile communication facilities should be used for negotiations of dispatchers
with the emergency repair and restoration services.
5.13.10. The ОТС communication station control panels (commutators) should be located
at the working places of corresponding managers (duty officers), and connecting
communication lines should be organized between them.
5.13.11. The local substation communication should be organized by the local battery
system using the conductors of control cables of the substation automation facilities as the
communication lines.
5.13.12. In the PAS networks the groups should be organized by the following line
sections:
а) tunnel - tunnels and tunnel ventilation installations;
b) platform – platforms and middle halls of stations;
c) escalator - escalator tunnels areas of approach to them;
d) vestibule – ticket halls and areas of entrance to and exit from them to the pedestrian
crossings;
e) street – territory in front of the entrance to the station vestibules or to the underground
crossings;
f) service – corridors of production and domestic premises of the stations at all levels;
g) fire notifications – according to the clause 5.16.4.
The notification should be provided:
а) from the station dispatcher point and dispatching center (adjacent to the station
dispatcher point) – by all groups;
b) from the automated check-point cab – by the vestibule and street groups;
c) from the operator booth near the bottom sites of escalators – by the escalator group;
d) from the cabs of dispatching center stations with gridiron – by the platform group.
5.13.13. The tele-monitoring from the station dispatcher point should comprise the
following station areas:
- entrances to the stations (toward the passenger flow);
- ticket hall of the vestibule, automated check-point (toward the passenger flow),
staircases;
- upper and bottom sites of escalators;
- middle hall, crossing staircases;
- passenger platforms of the 1st and 2nd tracks along the whole length, train route numbers;
- balconies, galleries along the whole length;
- end doors of platform from the side of tunnel, including the service bridge;
- interchange structure corridors (opposite to the passenger flow);
- sector of adjacency of the interchange structure corridor to the middle hall of the station,
Page 82 of 295

if this area is not controlled by other tele-cameras;
- under-street crossings in the area of Underground Railroad control;
- ramps and portals of the tunnels at the open line sections;
- telecontrol of other station areas according to the design assignment.
5.13.14. Arrangement of the tele-monitoring at the other objects of the Underground
Railroad, as well as the necessity of transmission of the pictures of separate observation areas
to the line dispatcher point should be reflected in the design assignment.
5.13.15. The intercom system (membrane) «passenger-fare collector» should be provided
at the cash windows.
At the deep burial stations the line with sockets for connection of intercommunication
facilities of firefighting subdivisions should be provided in accordance with the clause 5.16.7.
5.13.16. At the stations the electric clock showing the current and interval time should be
provided:
а) current time, digital – in the ends of the platform from the side of the train departure, in
the ticket halls of vestibules, at the station dispatcher point;
b) interval time, digital - in the ends of the platform from the side of the train departure;
c) current time, secondary – at the premises according to the Appendix 5.13А and at the
places of train turn around, near the service platform from the side of the train departure.
The secondary electric clock network control should be provided from the primary electric
clock installed at the station and checked by the standard time signals of the city radio
broadcasting net.
5.13.17. The warning signalization should be provided:
а) from the station dispatcher point - to the ticket offices and automated check-points;
b) from the automated check-point cab and operator booths near the escalators – to the
station dispatcher point.
The call signaling by the any communication type should be provided:
а) from the premises of the police post – to the ticket hall;
b) from the premises of the escalator machinist – to the machine and tension rooms;
c) from the station dispatcher point - to the platform halls;
d) from the substation duty officer table – to the substation premises.
The repeaters of the public address system by all types of communication, except for the Т
communication, should be provided at the outdoor telephones.
5.13.18. The input of the city telephone network should be provided at the stations. The
input capacity should be defined on the base of conditions of the automatic telephones
installation and connection, and, according the customer assignment, telephone receivers of
additional subscribers.
5.13.19. The trunk networks should be provided in the line ОТС at the section from the
line dispatcher point to the stations, and between the stations.
The trunk network capacity should be defined taking into consideration provision of all
types of the line ОТС, reserve channels, reserve conductors, and perspectives of the line
development.
5.13.20. The method of the trunk networks organization (primary, secondary, or mixed)
should be defined taking into consideration:
- length and perspectives of the line development (or its section);
- remoteness of the line from the line dispatcher point;
- number of stations in the line;
- possibility of combination of different communication circuits and other information
transmission circuits in one network.
5.13.21. The primary trunk network should be organized using the devices of the digital
information transmission systems; formation of the group transmission paths and voicefrequency channels for the communication networks should be provided.
Page 83 of 295

The fiber-optic cables should be used as the communication lines. The communication
lines should be reserved by means of application of parallel cables and blocks of the digital
transmission system facilities providing the switch of the communication lines to the reserve
channel.
5.13.22. The secondary trunk network should be organized, as a rule, in the physical cable
circuits. The reserve circuits should be provided in different cables.
5.13.23. The station and tunnel networks should be provided in the physical cable circuits.
The track gates or, in case of their unavailability, current distribution points of the lighting
network should be accepted as the edges of the tunnel networks.
5.13.24. As the reserve power capability for the facilities the following should be accepted:
in the line dispatcher point – electric power supply facilities, at the stations – uninterruptable
power supply rated for the emergency power supply during one hour.
5.13.25. The following main premises should be provided for location of the
communication facilities:
а) in the line dispatcher point premises – the line-switching room for the digital
transmission system facilities and line-switching hall for the regulatory and control ОТС
facilities. It is allowed to provide the common communication equipment room;
b) at the station - line-switching room, switch room, and radio center.
5.14. Location of operation personnel
5.14.1. Composition and manpower of the maintenance subdivisions located at the stations
should be defined according to the Appendix 5.14А; specialties, production process groups,
daily working periods - according to the Appendix 5.14B; name (designation) and area of the
premises - according to the Appendices 5.14C and 5.14D.
5.14.2. Composition and manpower of the operating subdivisions for the sections of
extending of operating lines should be defined taking into consideration the existing line
subdivisions.
5.14.3. Distribution of the subdivision personnel should be provided within the service
sites and, where possible, equably by the line stations.
5.15. Electric depot
5.15.1. Buildings and structures
5.15.1.1. The following buildings and structures should be located at the electric depot
territory:
а) to provide the electric depot activities:
1) administrative-and-domestic building;
2) storage-and-repair-building;
3) production shops;
4) routine maintenance (RM)-3 shop;
5) regenerative car painting and drying shop;
6) car washing and blowing chamber;
7) TSS and SS;
8) compressor station;
9) electrical centralization post;
10) treatment facilities;
11) rail-motor cars and motor cars filling station;
12) storages: materials, reserve aggregates, units and details, fuel-and-lubricating
materials;
13) parking tracks;
14) parking line section and pointsman's tower with domestic premises, shops and
storages;
15) check passage with automated entrance and exit control facilities;
16) tunnel portal security post;
Page 84 of 295

17) site for storage, technical maintenance and repair of the intra-depot vehicles;
18) covered sites for cargo and metal scrap, equipped with electric cranes;
19) snow melter or snow mold-board;
20) boiler house;
21) loading dock near the railroad track;
22) sports-ground;
23) guarded personal motor transport parking;
b) to provide the line operation:
1) rail-motor cars shop;
2) electric locomotive shop;
3) restoration facilities point;
4) site for storage of the superstructure elements;
5) swinging circle or reversing triangle;
6) different designation storages, blocked with production buildings or free-standing;
7) site with bins for storage of cement and sand equipped with electrical crane;
8) site for collection and mechanical loading of waste and metal scrap with container
washing point;
9) sedimentation reservoir for drain of slurry taken from the drainage plants, drainage tanks
by the used petroleum product types;
10) common shops of operating services;
11) rail welding station (in the electric depot having the connecting branch with railroad).
Facilities indicated in the а) 19 sub-point should be provided in the regions with average
height of snow cover during winter is more than 20 cm; in the а) 20 sub-point – in case of
unavailability of municipal heating network; in the а) 23 sub-point – behind the electric depot
fence.
The composition and requirements to the buildings and structures listed in the sub-point b)
should be reflected in the line and electric depot design assignment.
The structures in the а) 8, 10, 11, 12, 20 sub-points should be provided for the typical or reused projects.
5.15.1.2. The technical equipment of the production buildings and structures should
correspond to the technological processes of maintenance and repair of rolling stocks with
application of progressive techniques and equipment.
Architectural-and-construction solutions by the buildings and structures should correspond
to the natural landscape and urban planning.
5.15.1.3. Heating and ventilation buildings should be provided according to the SNiP 41-01,
heat supply from the municipal networks - according to the SNiP 41-02 or, in case of
unavailability of municipal network, from the self-contained boiler room, water supply from
the municipal networks, internal water pipeline and sewerage - according to the SNiP 2.04.01,
SNiP 2.04.02, SNiP 2.04.03.
5.15.1.4. The parking tracks should be located on the one side, in case of substantiation –
on the both sides of the storage-and-repair building (SRB).
The number of tracks in the storage-and-repair building should be defined on the base of
conditions of placement of the cars operating fleet, reserve cars in the amount of 10 % of the
operating fleet, and special cars (cargo car, track measurement car, laboratory), excluding the
cars located on the line.
At the up to 200 car inventory fleet the number of tracks should be increased by one track
for shunting movements, at the more than 200 car fleet – by two tracks; in addition, one track
should be provided for cleaning and washing of the under-car equipment.
The length of the each track should be defined on the base of length uncoupled rolling
stock at the distance of 1 m automatic coupling between the adjacent cars.
During the first period of the line operation, at the less number of cars in a train, it is
Page 85 of 295

allowed to place on the each track two uncoupled rolling stocks with the distance between
them no less than 3 m.
5.15.1.5. The span sizes in the storage-and-repair buildings should be accepted according
to the Table 5.15.1.
T a b l e 5.15.1
Name

Size of the span for, no less than, m,
Storage, TM
RM-2,
(technical
RM-1
RM-3
maintenance)
4,8
9,6

Height from the rail heads to the bottom of bearing structures
Width of the passage:
between the car bodies (if there are no columns between the tracks)
1,6
2,0
3,1
between the columns and car body
1,35
1,5
between the span walls and car body
1,15 (1,1)
between the shop wall and car body
2,6
2,8
between the wall opposite to the shop wall, and car body
1,7 (1,1)
3,8 (2,4)
From the front end wall to the upper stair of the staircases to the
2,3
inspection pit
The same, from the back end wall
3,0
4,5
Distance from the upper stair of the staircases to the inspection pit to the
1,5
car automatic coupling axis
Depth of the inspection pit from the rail heads
1,4
Width of the inspection pit
1,35
Gates: height from the rail heads, and width
3,9×3,8
N o t e - the allowable narrowing of the passage at the length no more than 6m is indicated in the brackets.

5.15.1.6. All tracks of the storage-and-repair building and RM-3 shop should have the
inspection pits. The niches on the both sides in every 20m for installation of the electrical
equipment and compressed air pipelines with air intake valves in every 20m, and water-andoil collector in front of the first valve should be provided in the pits.
At the all tracks of the storage-and-repair building the brackets of the car blow-out valve
and bumping posts should be provided. The special wheel-pair turning lathe acting without
removing the wheels from under the car should be provided at one of the tracks.
5.15.1.7. The independent entrance to the RM-3 for the motor transport equipped with the
warm air curtain should be provided.
No less than two bridge cranes with 10 ton lifting capacity should be installed in the shop.
5.15.1.8. The floor level in the spans of the storage-and-repair building, except for the RM3 span, should be accepted to be 0,5m below the level of the rail heads. In the RM-3 span the
floor level should be on the level of the rail heads.
5.15.1.9. The gate leaves of the storage-and-repair building should be equipped with
electric drives and should be sealed in the closed position; they should have locking facilities
for open and closed positions, and inspection windows at the level of 1,4 m from the level of
the rail heads. The 0,8×1,8m door should be in one of the gate leaves of the each span.
5.15.1.10. Three underground adjacent corridors should be provided along the front wall of
the storage-and-repair building: the first one – to supply the air to the warm air curtain of the
gate, the second and third ones – for the cable and heating networks. It is allowed to lay the
heating and hot water supply networks in the first corridor.
5.15.1.11. The administrative-and-domestic building (ADB) should be located near the
storage-and-repair building, and heated passage should be provided between them.
In the administrative-and-domestic building the block of the drivers rest premises,
administrative-management personnel premises, rolling stock operation shop and repair shop
production personnel premises, medical center, catering and sanitary-domestic premises
should be provided.
The composition and areas of the premises should be defined by calculation according to
the staff schedule of the electric depot.
Page 86 of 295

5.15.1.12. The car washing and blowing chambers should be provided in the composition
of the first stage of construction of the electric depot.
5.15.1.13. The rail-motor cars and locomotive shops should be located in the separate
building. It is allowed to block them with other production buildings.
The length of the shops should be defined on the base of number of traction and trailing
units, but no less than 36 m, the height - 6,2 m to the girder bottom.
The number of tracks in the each shop should be defined by calculation, but should be no
less than four.
The inspection pit having the dimensions according to the Table 5.15.1 should be provided
at the each track.
The frame cranes with lifting capacity 3,2 ton should be installed in the shops.
The block of sanitary-domestic and production premises composition of which for
locomotive shop should include the premises for storage and maintenance of accumulators
and charging 825V switchboard should be provided in the shops.
The ride of locomotives from the shop using the accumulator traction should be provided.
5.15.1.14. The compressor station should be located in the separate building. The number
of compressors and capacity of the station should be defined by calculation taking into
consideration one reserve machine.
At the station the measures on the noise and vibration level reduction to the level according
to the clause 5.17 of the SNiP 32-02 should be taken.
5.15.1.15. The production shops should be located in the storage-and-repair building near
the RM-3 shop. The technological openings should be provided in the wall between them.
The shop building should have two or three floors, 12m width, and the length equal to the
length of the storage-and-repair building. The designation and areas of the premises should be
accepted according to the approved re-used solutions.
In the shops the site for cleaning and washing of the dust filters of the local ventilation line
and electric depot should be provided.
5.15.1.16. The regenerative car painting and drying shop should be located in the separate
building. It is allowed to block it with the different designation building in case of observance
of fire safety requirements.
The area of buildings should be defined on the base of location of two car places,
production premises (ventilation, switch, firefighting plants, etc), storages, premises for
personnel and sanitary-domestic premises.
5.15.1.17. The TSS should be integrated with rail-motor car shop or with the other
designation building. The SS should be located in the block of production shops and other
production buildings on the base of their demand in electric power.
5.15.1.18. In the administrative-and-domestic building and storage-and-repair building the
reserve hot water supply from the electrical water heaters should be provided. In the other
production buildings the electrical water heaters should be applied for the hot water supply.
In the administrative-and-domestic building the hot water from the electrical water heaters
should be led to catering and two showers, in the storage-and-repair building - to the wash
basins in the RM-3 shop, and one wash basin in the each span.
5.15.1.19. The wash basins with cold and hot water and connection to the domestic
sewerage network should be provided near the front and back walls of the storage-and-repair
building by the adjacent span axis.
5.15.1.20. Heating of the inspection pits and warm air curtains of the gates of the storageand-repair buildings should be provided according to the SNiP 41-01.
5.15.2. Track and contact rail
5.15.2.1. Track
5.15.2.1.1. The plan and longitudinal profile of the tracks should correspond to the Table
5.15.2.
Page 87 of 295

T a b l e 5.15.2
Parameter

Standard
In difficult
basic
conditions
75
60

Radius of the curvature in plan for the parking tracks, m, no less than
Track switch frog mark for the rolling stock turn around tracks:
Underground Railroad
1:5
Railroads with rail gage of 1520 mm
1:9
Length of the straight section of electrified parking track, m, no less than, located
between two curvatures in plan, directed:
unidirectional
3
opposite
15
Length of the straight section of non-electrified parking track, m, no less than,
3
located between two curvatures in plan
Distance from the initial points of the curvature in plan and vertical curvature in
profile, m, no less than:
To the front wall of the storage-and-repair building
20
8
To the center of the track switch of 1:5 mark from the side of the point rails
10
8
Longitudinal slope of the parking tracks, ‰, no more than:
At the places of laying of the track switches
5
10
At the places of probable stop of the train (draw-out tracks, in front of the storage1,5
and-repair building)
Longitudinal slope of the depot tracks, ‰
0
Radius of the vertical curvature at the algebraic difference between the slope values 1500
equal to 2 or more ‰, m, no less than
Length of the element of parking tracks longitudinal profile:
electrified
Note 2
Non-electrified, m, no less than
50
40
Notes
1. Difficult conditions are the conditions connected with restricted dimensions of the electric depot territory.
2. The length of the element should be no less than the length of the train in perspective.

5.15.2.1.2. The curve sections of the parking tracks should be arranged without the
elevation of the outing rail over the inner rail and should be connected with the straight
sections without the easement curves.
5.15.2.1.3. The parking tracks at the places of laying of the track switches, and the depot
tracks should be located at the straight sections in the plan and profile.
5.15.2.1.4. The following should be provided as the substructures:
а) for the parking tracks – road bed according to the SNiP 32-01 for the II category
railroads, or flat basement made from reinforced concrete according to the clause 5.6;
б) for the depot tracks - reinforced concrete structures of the pits, or flat basement made
from reinforced concrete.
The rails, rail fastenings, track switches, rail seats, ballast layer should be provided in the
superstructure.
5.15.2.1.5. The following should be provided for the road beds:
- compaction of the grounds in the embankments;
- protective sand layer (except for fine and pulverescent sands) under the ballast section;
- removal of the surface and ground waters from the road bed;
- strengthening of the road bed embankments.
Thickness of the protective layer (sand cushion) in case of drain grounds should be no less
than 0,2 m, in case of the non-drain grounds - 0,8 m.
The slope grade of the protective layer should be 1:2.
5.15.2.1.6. Superstructure should correspond to the Table 5.15.3.
5.15.2.1.7. The width of the rail gage at the curve sections of parking tracks should be
defined for the each track separately, depending on the radius of the curve by the track axis.
T a b l e 5.15.3
Parameter

Tracks
Page 88 of 295

parking
Rail type
Cross-ties kind
Number of cross-ties per 1 km of the track, pieces:
At the straight and curve sections having the radius of 1200 m and more
At the curve sections having the radius less than 1200 m
N o t e – At the depot tracks the cross-ties are located along the track.

depot
used Р50
wooden

1600
1760

2×400

5.15.2.1.8. The intermediate rail fastenings should be of integral type, provided with the tie
plates and screw track-spikes.
At the electrified tracks the fastenings should provide the electrical insulation of rails from
the substructure.
5.15.2.1.9. To provide the electrical conductivity of the bolted rail joints at the track
switches included in the electrical centralization the electrical connectors should be applied, at
the other sections of the electrified tracks – beleville springs. In the exceptional cases the
electrical connectors can be applied instead of the beleville springs.
The electrical resistance of the bolted rail joint should be no more than the resistance of the
whole rail section of the 1m length.
The size of gaps in the current-conducting bolted rail joints should correspond to the Table
5.7.3.
The insulating bolted rail joints should be provided with polymeric fishplates or should be
of the adhesive-bolted type.
5.15.2.1.10. Rails of the electrified depot tracks should be separated from the rails of the
electrified parking tracks by two pairs of insulating joints located on the both sides of the
building wall with the distance of 12,5m between them.
5.15.2.1.11. At the track switches of the parking tracks included in the electrical
centralization the automated pneumatic blowing facilities or, according to the customer
requirements, electrical heating facilities should be provided.
The all track switches should be equipped with shunting limit signals.
5.15.2.1.12. The wooden cross-ties according to the GOST 22830, and wooden timbers for
the track switches according to the GOST 8816 should be provided as the rail seats.
The wooden rail seat in the electrified tracks should be soaked with antiseptics not
conducting the electric current.
The wooden rail seat laid on the parking tracks should be positioned upper face up, on the
depot tracks - upper face down.
The wood screw holes drilled in the wooden rail seat at the laying on the track should be
three times creased with antiseptics not conducting the electric current.
5.15.2.1.13. For the ballast layer of the parking tracks the crushed natural stone of the И20,
И40 rocky marks by the abrasive resistance according the GOST 7392, or gravel ballast
according to the GOST 7394 should be provided.
Width of the ballast section atop at the single-line parking track sections should be no less
than 3,2m:
Surface of the ballast section should be 3 cm below the upper face of the wooden rail seat,
the slope grade of the ballast section - 1:1,5.
Thickness of the ballast layer under the wooden rail seat at the places of the rail location
should be no less than 25 cm.
5.15.2.1.14. The external railroad approach tracks connecting the tracks of the electric
depot with the tracks of the common railroad network, and internal railroad tracks situated at
the electric depot territory and designated for interchange of rolling stocks of the 1520 mm
rail gage railroads should be provided according to the STN Ц-01 and SNiP 2.05.07,
correspondingly.
5.15.2.1.15. Calculations of the superstructure should be executed taking into consideration
the range of the rail temperature variation according to the clause 5.7.1.
Page 89 of 295

5.15.2.2. Contact rail
5.15.2.2.1. The distance between the brackets for the contact rail fixing should be within
4,5m and 5,4m, at the depot track in the rolling stocks blowing chamber – no more than 6,0m.
5.15.2.2.2. Welding of the contact rail in the rail string should be executed by the electric
contact method. The length of the rail strings at the parking tracks should be no more than
37,5 m, at the depot track in the rolling stocks blowing chamber - 100 m.
The temperature joints should be provided at the welded rail strings connection places.
The values of the temperature joint electrical resistance and the gaps in the temperature
joints should correspond to the Table 5.7.2.
The distance between the brackets adjacent to the temperature joints should be no more
than 2,5 m.
5.15.2.2.3. The contact rail should be fixed from the creeping by means of installation of
four anticreeping devices on the welded rail string regardless from its length.
5.15.2.2.4. It the places of sectioning of the contact network, in the places of location of the
track switches and equipment the contact rail air gaps should be provided.
In the places of arrangement of the air gaps at the contact rails the end ramps with the 1:25
slope should be provided.
The distance between the metal ends of contact rail ramps overlapping by the trolleys of
one passenger car should be no more than 10 m, non-overlapping by the car trolleys - no less
than 14 m.
The equipment installed within the air gap of the contact rail should be located at the
distance no less than 0,8 m from the metal end of the ramp.
The distance from the motor transport road edge to the metal end of the ramp of the contact
rail should be no less than 1,5 м.
At the parking places the air gaps should be located taking into consideration possibility of
the most convenient passages to the pointsman's towers, storage rooms, equipment.
5.15.2.2.5. The length of the contact rail with ending ramps should be no less than 18,7 m.
In the constrained conditions in case it is necessary to locate the equipment in the area of the
contact rail laying, it is allowed to accept the length of the contact rail with ending ramps no
less than 9,0 m with its fixing by the anticreeping devices at the each bracket.
5.15.2.2.6. It is not allowed to equip with contact rails the following tracks:
- parking tracks of different designation shops, as well as tracks for loading and unloading
of cargos and interchange of the rolling stocks of the 1520 mm rail gage railroads;
- depot tracks of storage-and-repair buildings, different designation shops and rolling
stocks washing chamber.
5.15.2.2.7. The calculations of the contact rail should be executed taking into consideration
the intervals of the rail temperature variations according to the clause 5.7.1.
5.15.3. Electric power supply
5.15.3.1. Feeding of the TSS should be provided by analogy with the clause 5.10.2.
Feeding of the SS should be provided by two inputs from the different sections of the TSS
10KV switchboard.
5.15.3.2. Feeding of the 825V traction network should be provided: the main – from the
TSS; the reserve – from the contact rails of the connecting tracks of the branch leading to
electric depot.
At the TSS two converting units should be provided, the each one with connected power
supply line equipped with high-speed circuit breaker and electrical driven line disconnector.
One feeding line should be connected to the distributing point DP1 in the storage-andrepair-building, the second one – to the distributing point DP2 at the parking tracks. The
distributing point should be equipped with hand driven line disconnector. It is allowed to
provide the electrical driven line disconnectors in the distributing points.
Page 90 of 295

The contact network of the storage-and-repair-building and parking track adjacent to the
storage-and-repair-building is supplied with power from DP1, the contact rails of the parking
tracks are supplied with power from the DP2.
The DP1 should be located in the separate room.
The interconnection of the DP1 and DP2 should be provided through the parking track
contact rails, cable jumpers between them, and positive 825V bus of the storage-and-repairbuilding.
In case of availability of locomotive shop and balloon track around shop the 825V
switchboard should be provided at the TSS. Feeding of the charging distributing point of
locomotive shop and contact rail of the balloon track around shop should be provided directly
from the TSS. It is allowed to provide their feeding from the nearest contact rail.
5.15.3.3. The parking track contact rails should be separated to the 4 - 5 track groups; the
power supply to the each group should be provided directly from the DP1 and DP2.
5.15.3.4. At the electrified parking tracks in the negative boosting main one track rail
should be used, as a rule, from the side of the contact rail location.
The interconnection of the traction lines of the track rails should be provided on the base of
conditions that the each track section should have no less than two traction current outputs to
the negative boosting main.
5.15.3.5. The each feeding and negative boosting line, as well as jumpers between the
contact and track rails should consist of no less than two cables or wires. At the loop feed of
the contact rail the jumpers can contain one cable only.
5.15.3.6. In the storage-and-repair-building, together with the RM-3, along each track the
contact busduct with special current collectors should be provided. The busduct should be
located on the height no less than 4,0 m from the level of the rail heads on the right side in the
direction of the rolling stock exit from the building, at the distance of 1,6 m from the track
axis.
The contact busduct and traction line of the each track rail should be connected to the
collecting positive and negative 823V buses using the hand driven disconnectors. The
negative bus with no less than two jumpers should be connected with the parking track rails.
The contact busduct connection to the traction line of the track rail in case of de-energizing
of this track should be provided using the lug of the current collector; the short-circuiting
node should be located at the entrance to the pit.
The catenary arcs should be provided for the leading connection of the track rail with the
negative boosting mine in case of switching the disconnector on at the switch blade.
The positive bus should be connected to the DP1 (main feeding) and to the contact rail of
the last parking track leading to the building (reserve feeding) using the hand driven
disconnectors.
The collecting buses should be located over the gates.
5.15.3.7. The each track of the storage-and-repair building should be equipped with the
sound and light alarm, warning the power supply to the contact busduct of this track.
5.15.3.8. In the storage-and-repair building and other buildings the natural and artificial
lighting should be provided according to the SNiP 23-05 and КСЦ Metro-2.
The gas discharge lamps should be applied for the common artificial lighting of premises,
if there are no other requirements.
The common lighting of the inspection pits should be provided using the 220VAC
stationary lamps, and local lighting – using the 12V portable lamps. The laying of the lighting
network in the thin-walled metal pipes should be provided in the pits. The 220V lamps
structure should prevent the access to the lamp without application of tool. The lamps should
be located checkered alternate in every 5 m on the both sides of the pit. The sockets for
portable lamps connection should be provided in every 10 m on the one side of the pit, and in
the routine maintenance track pits – checkered alternate on the both sides of the pit.
Page 91 of 295

In the passages between the tracks with lowered floor the local 12V lighting network with
sockets in every 20 m on the external side surface of the each track cross-ties.
5.15.3.9. In the car routine maintenance spans of the storage-and-repair building the
380/220V networks with plug-and-socket units in every 20 m for connection of 20 KW
welding and regulatory aggregates should be provided along the spine walls and columns.
In the MR-1, MR-2, and MR-3 spans at the car balloon tracks in the inspection pits the 65
VDC network should be provided with 160A plug-and-socket units in every 15 m fed from
the 10KW rectifier units.
5.15.3.10. The electric depot territory should have the common lighting with headlights
and security lighting by the territory fencing perimeter according to the КСЦ Metro-2. The
lighting should be remote and automated controlled.
5.15.3.11. At the parking tracks the 380/220V three-phase networks with the line boxes
should be provided for the connection of up to 60KW aggregates, and 220V networks with
the line boxes for connection of up to 10KW electrical tools; the boxes should be located: the
first ones – in every 100 m, the second ones – in every 50 m in the track area.
5.15.3.12. Laying of the cable on the electric depot territory should be provided in the
cable tunnel, open by the cable structures, in the separate or common cable ducts separated by
asbestos-cement partitions.
Combined laying of the power cables and train traffic control cables in the ducts is not
allowed.
Laying of the cables under the parking tracks should be provided in the metal pipes with
armored protective covering according to the GOST 9.602 regardless from the corrosion
activity of the ground. The laying of cables under the points and frogs of the track switches is
not allowed.
Method of laying should be selected on the base of number of the cables, area of their
laying, and possibility of their protection from mechanical damages.

5.15.4. Train traffic control
5.15.4.1. The track switches at the electrified parking tracks should be provided with
electrical drives, and should be included in the electrical centralization system. At the
settlement of the train traffic route the automatic route point control is allowed.
The track switches at the non-electrified parking tracks with hand-worked shift mechanism
should be provided.
5.15.4.2. Calling-on signals should be installed on the entrance and exit traffic lights, group
exit traffic lights at the exit from the parking tracks, and traffic lights of the safety tracks.
5.15.4.3. At the parking tracks the traffic lights should be installed on the shortened or
dwarf type posts applied at the Russian railroads.
The traffic lights should be marked with the alphabet characters with addition of the
sequential number of the traffic light and the track number of the storage-and-repair-building.
5.15.4.4. At the track sections in front of the exit traffic lights and balloon tracks the train
traffic interval regulation and safety system (TTIRSS) should be provided.
At the depot tracks, except for the routine maintenance tracks and tracks of washing and
blowing of rolling stocks, the train devices functionality checking facilities of the automated
speed regulation (ASR) should be installed.
5.15.4.5. Grounding of the metal structures and equipment enclosures, except for the
impedance bond with secondary winding enclosures and point operating gear, should be
provided to the common protective earthing system for the electrical installations located in
the electric depot.
5.15.4.6. The train traffic control facilities should meet the requirements of the Regulations
[9] and Instructions [8].
5.15.5. Communication
Page 92 of 295

5.15.5.1. The subscriber’s telephones of the line Operative-Technological Communication
(ОТС) should be provided in the following premises (areas):
а) TTDC Communication – in the premises of the electric depot duty officer, restoration
facilities point, electrical centralization post, and parking track posts;
b) PSDC Communication – in the TSS and SS;
c) Т Communication – near the entrance and exit traffic lights of the parking tracks.
N o t e – Designation of the communication types – according to the clause 5.13.

5.15.5.2. For organization of the telephone general usage communication, as a rule, the
ATC should be provided. The list of subscribers included in the АТС should be reflected in
the design assignment.
5.15.5.3. The depot ОТС should include the communication types according to the Table
5.15.4.
T a b l e 5.15.4
ОТС
Point Switch
Electric depot duty officer
Electric depot master
Shunting radio
Repair-operative radio

Designation
PSC
D
P
SRC
RORC

5.15.5.4. The control panels (commutators) of the depot ОТС should be located at the
administrators with organization of communication lines between them.
The PSC Communication should be provided between the electrical centralization post and
parking track posts, and the storage-and-repair building, electric depot duty officer, rail-motor
cars and locomotive shops.
The СТР telephones should be installed:
- near the point operating gear group;
- near the single point operating gear;
- at the point switch posts at the parking tracks;
- on the front wall of the storage-and-repair building.
The D Communication should be provided between the electric depot duty officer and
storage-and-repair building posts, as well as with subscribers according to the list rendered by
the customer.
The P Communication should be provided between the master, chief engineer of the
electric depot, electric depot duty officer, and managers of shops and departments.
The SRC Communication should be provided:
- between the electrical centralization duty officer and drivers of rolling stocks at the
parking tracks;
- between the control instrumentation workers and drivers of rolling stocks in the storageand-repair building (at the testing of locomotive radio stations).
The RORC Communication should be provided between the electric depot duty officer and
electrical centralization duty officer, and personnel being at the parking tracks and in the
storage-and-repair building.
The composition of the technical radio communication facilities should include the
stationary and portative radio station. Within the electric depot several radio communication
circuits can be organized. All radio stations of one circuit should operate at one selected
working frequency. The customer gives the permission for usage of radio stations and radio
frequencies.
5.15.5.5. The RAS communication should be provided with division to the following
warning groups:
- storage-and-repair building spans;
- parking tracks;
- production shops;
Page 93 of 295

- administrative-and-domestic building (ADB);
- rail-motor cars and locomotive shops.
In addition, the loud-speakers should be included in these or additional warning groups in
the MR shop, car painting and drying shop, car washing and blowing chambers, at the
substations, and other auxiliary structures.
The warning should be conducted:
а) from the electric depot duty officer – by all groups;
b) from the posts on the front wall of the storage-and-repair building spans – by the
storage-and-repair building groups;
c) from the electrical centralization duty officer – by the parking track group;
d) from the electric depot master – by the production shops and ADB group.
The loud-speakers at the parking track should be located taking into consideration
directional effect of the sound and decrease of the noise level outside the electric depot.
The LSC communication should be provided between the electric depot duty officer and
posts in the storage-and-repair building, as well as between the posts.
One apparatus set should be used, as a rule, for organization of the PAS and LSC
communication.
5.15.5.6. The tele-monitoring from the electric depot security premises should comprise the
fencing of the territory (by the whole length); people and motor cars entrance areas, ramp and
portal of the tunnel branch to the electric depot.
5.15.5.7. In the ADB the city telephone and radio broadcast network inputs should be
provided.
5.16. Fire safety
5.16.1. Construction structures and materials
5.16.1.1. The construction structures of the underground facilities should be made from
non-flammable materials, fire-resistance rating of which should be accepted according to the
SNiP 32-02.
5.16.1.2. The new construction sites at the places of adjacency to operating Underground
Railroad lines should be separated by the 1st type fire safety partitions according to the SNiP
21-01, preventing penetration of the fire and combustion products to the operating part of the
Underground Railroad, and vice versa.
5.16.1.3. The placed at the stations advertisement made from combustible materials should
occupy no more than 5 % of the structure internal surface area.
The thickness of the combustible material of advertisement should be no more than 0,4
mm, and should be stuck on the non-flammable base without the air gaps. The advertisement
panel dimensions should not exceed 5m by the width, and 2m by the height. The distance
between the panels should be no less than 1 m. The advertisement structures should be
executed from the non-flammable materials, fastenings of the panels at the evacuation ways
should sustain the temperature of 300 °С during 1 hour.
5.16.2. Categories of premises and facilities by the explosion and fire hazard
5.16.2.1. The categories of premises by the explosion and fire hazard should be accepted
according to the Appendix 5.16А.
5.16.2.2. In the vestibules, escalator tunnels (staircases), platform and middle halls of the
stations, tunnels and other objects not separated from the adjacent facilities by the
construction structures the zones (parts of premises and structures) should be divided by the
explosion and fire hazard to the zones with the fire load different by its characteristics from
the fire load of the other part of premises or structures.
5.16.2.3. At the selection of category of premises and structures, as well as their zones the
maximum specific value of the fire load for the one-type groups of premises and structures, as
well as their zones should be defined taking into consideration the following:
- in the inclined escalator tunnels the area of allocation of the fire load should be accepted
Page 94 of 295

as horizontal projection of the inclined section;
- calculation of the specific and fire load, represented by the electric cables should be
executed by the formula
n

H к .сQнр ∑ mi
g = 0,272

i =1

S n .c

,

where g is the specific fire load, MJ⋅m-2;
0,272 is the coefficient considering the average mass fraction of the combustible cable
materials in the cable premises;
Qнр is the low heat value of the cable insulating materials equal to 37,6 MJ⋅kg-1;

mi is the mass of running meter of the i-th cable in the cross-section of premises, kg⋅m-1;
п is the number of cables in the most occupied by them cross-section of premises;
Нк.с is the height of the cable structure, m;
Sк.с is the premises cross-section area, m2.
5.16.3. Water supply
5.16.3.1. The firefighting water supply network for the underground facilities should be
provided according to the clause 5.9.
5.16.3.2. In the escalator tunnels of the deep burial stations and in the tunnel ventilation
installation (TVI) shafts installation of standpipe having the conditional diameter of 80mm
should be provided. One connecting head should be installed at the top of the standpipe, and
two connecting heads at the bottom for the connection of the fire hoses. Upstream the
connecting heads the shut-off fittings should be provided, and the heads should be equipped
with plugs. The type and diameter of the connecting heads should be accepted by the
coordination with the municipal firefighting service.
5.16.3.3. The hydraulic pressure head in the domestic-and-firefighting water pipeline
system at the level of the lowest fire cock should not exceed 60 m.
In case of exceeding of this value and unavailability of reducing units at the station, in case
of the fire cock pressure heads more than 40 m at the intake of water between the fire cock
and connecting head the diaphragms reducing the excessive pressure head should be installed.
5.16.3.4. The consumption of water on the internal firefighting should be defined on the
base of the following conditions:
а) number of fires in the line - 1;
b) number of streams for:
1) platform part of the station, dead end - 3;
2) ticket hall of the vestibule, corridors of the service and production premises, machine
rooms of escalators and escalator tunnels, main line and connecting branch tunnels, gallery of
the above-ground section, interchange unit corridor - 2;
c) water consumption on one stream should be accepted, l⋅s-1, for:
1) platform part of the station and dead end - 3,3;
2) main line and connecting branch tunnels, gallery of the above-ground section, ticket hall
of the vestibule, corridors of the service, production, and other premises and structures - 2,5;
г) radius of the compact part of the stream, no less, m, for:
1) platform part of the station, main line and connecting branch tunnels, gallery of the
above-ground section - 10;
2) main line tunnel, ticket hall of the vestibule, corridors of the service, production, and
other premises and structures - 6.
The necessity of application of the firefighting booster pumping plants should be defined
by calculation.
5.16.3.5. The fire cocks should be located in the number of:
а) with one 20m fire hose and high-pressure firefighting hose:
Page 95 of 295

1) in the ticket hall of the vestibule - 2;
2) in the ends of the interchange corridor, near the entrances to the premises adjacent to the
interchange corridor - 1;
3) in the pre-escalator area, machine room and tension chamber of escalators - 1;
4) in the rolling stock technical maintenance point - 1 per floor;
5) in the corridors of service and production premises - 1 in every 20 m.
For the premises located in the interchange corridor with dimensions exceeding the area of
application of the fire cock (26 m) the installation of the cocks inside the premises should be
provided as well:
6) in the tension chamber of escalators;
b) with two 20m fire hoses and high-pressure firefighting hose:
1) in the both ends of the station platform of the each track - 1;
2) in the ends and middle of the single-line dead end tunnel – on the one side, double-line
dead end – on the both sides - 1;
c) without the fire hose and high-pressure firefighting hose with distance between them, m:
1) in the escalator tunnel, in one of the middle passages under the balustrade of escalator 30;
2) in the single-line main line tunnel - on the one side, in the double-line main line tunnel
and gallery of the above-ground section on the both sides, checkered alternate - 90;
d) in the single-line dead end tunnel - on the one side, double-line dead end – on the both
sides - 30.
At the platform length more than 100 m the fire cock without the fire hose and highpressure firefighting hose should be installed on the wall of the cabinet in the middle part of
the platform for the each track. Location of the fore cocks at the platforms in hatches is
allowed in case of impossibility of their installation on the wall of the cabinet.
5.16.3.6. The fire cocks with fire hoses and high-pressure firefighting hoses located in the
cabinets should correspond to the NPB 151 and NPB 160, should not prevent the people
evacuation and cleaning of the premises. The depth of the fire cabinets should be maximal.
The fire cock diameter should be equal to 50 mm, internal diameter of the fire hose - 51 mm,
diameter of the squirt of the high-pressure firefighting hose nozzle in the platform halls of the
stations and in the dead ends - 16 mm, at the other places - 13 mm.
Designation of the fire cocks location should be executed according to the NPB 160. The
covers of the fire cock hatches should have the symbol embossing «PK».
At the places inaccessible for passengers open location of the fire cocks can be provided; in
this case the hoses should be placed in cassettes.
The fire cocks without hoses should be located in the hatches or on the walls. In case of
placement of the fire cock in the hatch the convenience of its operation and technical
maintenance should be provided. The distance from the fire cock valve and connecting head
to the hatch cover should compile no more than 30 cm.
5.16.3.7. In the each platform end of the 1st and 2nd station track the installation of the
0,9×0,25×1,0m built-in or floor-standing cabinet should be provided for the hand fire
extinguishers and two 20m fire hoses with high-pressure firefighting hoses, as well as floorstanding cabinet having dimensions no more than 0,6×0,6×1,7m for portable dry chemical
(carbon-dioxide) fire extinguisher.
5.16.3.8. The period of the fire cocks operation should be no less than 3 hours.
In the premises equipped with automatic firefighting plant it is allowed to locate the
internal fire cocks in one water sprinkler network after the control units.
5.16.4. Automated fire detection and extinguishing installations, fire alarm and
evacuation control facilities
5.16.4.1. The above-ground premises and structures should be equipped with automated
fire alarm and extinguishing installations according to the NPB 110, and the underground ones
Page 96 of 295

– according to the Table 4 of the SNiP 32-02.
The dead end areas where the night storage of rolling stocks is supposed should be
equipped with local fire extinguishing installations.
5.16.4.2. The Automatic Firefighting Installation (AFFI) and Automatic Fire Alarm
Installation (AFAI) systems should be provided according to the NPB 88.
The AFAI receiving station should be located in the Station Dispatcher Point premises.
At the moment of activation of the AFAI installations the ventilators of the Local
Ventilation Installations should be switched off:
а) in case of fire in the premises at the level of the station platform – in the premises
located at this level of the station;
b) in case of fire in the vestibule – in the vestibule premises;
c) in case of fire in the near-station and near-tunnel structures – in the premises of these
structures.
Switching the ventilation systems on for operation in the smoke removal mode should be
provided from the Station Dispatcher Point.
At the moment of activation of AFFI in the storage-and-repair building of the electric
depot the internal 825V network power supply should be automatically disconnected. The
signal for disconnection should be sent in case of activation of annunciators installed at no
less than 2 circuits.
The total signal regarding the fire at the station and in the near-tunnel structures should be
sent to the Line Dispatcher Point through the Station Dispatcher Point, regarding the fire in
electric depot – directly to the Line Dispatcher Point.
5.16.4.3. At the arrangement of the automated water fire extinguishing the simultaneous
action of fire cocks and sprinkler or drencher installations should be taken into consideration.
5.16.4.4. At the upper and bottom pre-escalator sites near the escalator control cabinets the
sockets for connection of the firefighting subdivisions intercommunication devices should be
provided. The socket type should be accepted after the coordination with the municipal
firefighting service.
5.16.4.5. The people evacuation warning and control system (EWCS) should be divided to
three types depending on the total passenger flow at the station in the peak hours: 1 – up to
51; 2 - from 51 to 79, and 3 – more than 79 thousand passengers per hour.
The EWCS type selection should be executed by the Table 5.16.1.
T a b l e 5.16.1
Type

Parameter

Warning method:
sound (rings, tone signal)
voice (record and transmission of
special texts)
light:
Flashing arrows «Exit»
Flashing arrows indicating the
traffic direction
Bidirectional communication with
the Station Dispatcher Point
Video control
II Warning method:
sound (rings, tone signal)
voice (record and transmission of
special texts)
light:
Flashing arrows «Exit»

EWCS elements location area
Premises of
Main
Station Pedestrian Escalator
escalator machine
line
Vestibule
platform crossing tunnel
rooms personnel,
tunnel
TSS

Street

I

-

+

-

+

*

+
-

-

*

+
*

*
*

*
*

+
+

*

*

+

+

-

+

+

*2)

-

-

-

-

-

-

+

-

-

+

+1)

+

+

+
-

-

*

+

*

*

+

-

-

Page 97 of 295

EWCS elements location area
Premises of
Main
Type
Parameter
Station Pedestrian Escalator
escalator machine
line
Vestibule
Street
platform crossing tunnel
rooms personnel,
tunnel
TSS
Flashing arrows indicating the
*
*
+
+
+
*
traffic direction
Bidirectional communication with
+
+
*
+
+
*2)
*
the Station Dispatcher Point
Video control
+
*
*
+
*
III Warning method:
sound (rings, tone signal)
*
*
*
+
voice (record and transmission of
*
+
+1)
+
+
*
special texts)
light:
Flashing arrows «Exit»
*
+
*
*
+
*
Flashing arrows indicating the
+
+
*
*
+
*
traffic direction
Bidirectional communication with
+
+
+
+
+
*2)
*
the Station Dispatcher Point
Video control
+
+
+
+
*
N o t e - «+» - required; «*» - recommended; «-» - not required; «1)» - at the length of the pedestrian crossing more than
20 m; «2)» - in the substantiated cases (for example, with police post).

5.16.4.6 The total passenger flow in the peak hours, thousand passengers per hour, should
be defined by the formula
П = П1 + П2 + Пвх + Пп,
where П1, П2 are the passenger flows for the 1st and 2nd tracks, correspondingly;
Пвх is the total passenger flow of entrance from the surface;
Пп is the passenger flow from the adjacent line (for the interchange station).
5.16.4.7. The EWCS should provide:
- transmission of the sound and, where appropriate, light signals to the premises and
structures occupied by the personnel;
- broadcast of the voice warnings in case of fire;
- transmission of information about the fire emerging place, evacuation ways, and
measures providing the personal safety to the separate areas of the structures and premises;
- switching the evacuation lighting on;
- bidirectional communication of the Station Dispatcher Point with all premises occupied
by the personnel responsible for providing of safety evacuation of people;
- switching the sound and light indicators of recommended direction of evacuation on;
- simultaneous transmission of the warning signals to multiple areas and, where
appropriate, sequentially to the separate areas;
- operation during the whole evacuation period, including the evacuation from main line
tunnels.
The number of sound and voice annunciators, their location and capacity should provide
the necessary audibility at the all places occupied by the people. The annunciators should not
have the audio level control, and should be connected to the network without plug-and-socket
devices.
The control and EWCS devices should correspond to the requirements of NPB 77.
5.16.4.8. The EWCS should provide the prompt correction of control commands and, in
addition to broadcast of phonogram from the audio magnetic recorder, should provide the live
broadcast of voice warnings and control commands through the microphones from the Station
Dispatcher Point and from the posts near the station platform.
5.16.5. Ventilation and smoke protection
5.16.5.1. The smoke protection of the evacuation ways of the station should provide:
- prompt switching of the tunnel ventilation system to the emergency mode of operation;
Page 98 of 295

- protection of people from the smoke at the time of their exit from the train (trains) and
movement on the platform hall of the station;
- protection of people from the smoke at the time of their movement on the evacuation
ways till their exit outside, or their movement on the interchange escalators, corridors on the
settled routes depending on the seat of fire location at the station;
- smogless section of tunnel in which the train with people stopped, and the route section in
front of which is blocked by the breakdown train.
At the analysis of possible ways of the smoke distribution all stated by the SNiP 32-02
probable fire variants should be considered.
5.16.5.2. The tunnel ventilation system in the smoke protection mode should provide
evacuation of people from the underground structures at the fire. In case it is impossible to
provide the smoke protection using the tunnel ventilation the following measures should be
taken:
- functional smoke protection including the other planning solutions, the smoke screens in
the upper part of structures, prompt-erected ventilation brattice walls in the main line tunnels;
- removal of the smoke from the upper area of the platform halls of the station through the
special of operating ventilation channels;
- increasing of the tunnel ventilation installations’ ventilators power;
- pressurization fans in vestibules;
- ventilation system with separate aeration of the main line tunnels.
For reversible ventilators of the station станционной tunnel ventilation installation it is
recommended to provide the maximal productiveness in the exhaust mode.
5.16.5.3. It is recommended to execute the protection of people from the smoke during the
period of evacuation from platform halls of the station by means of creation of necessary
volume of the «smoke reservoir» under the hall vaults, or by means of removal of the smoke
from the upper part of the structure.
The extreme time of evacuation (evacuation ways block time) should be considered as the
time during which the bottom frontage of the smoke reaches the level of 2,5 m from the hall
floor. At the definition of this time period the fire area (perimeter) from the fire start moment,
and removal of the part of smoke by ventilation should be considered. For calculations the fire
of the train emerged in the tunnel at the line speed of the fire distribution of 1 m⋅min-1 should
be accepted.
5.16.5.4. To protect the people from penetration of the smoke at the evacuation ways the
following should be provided:
- creation of the air flow in the area of adjacency of the evacuation ways to the platform
halls of the station with the speed no less than 1,7 m⋅s-1;
- separation of the upper area of the station hall from the evacuation ways by the smoke
screen with the height from the evacuation way floor level no more than 2,5 m, and no less
than 2,2 m;
- separation of the evacuation ways from the platform hall of the station by the smoke
screen. The height of the opening between the station hall and escalator tunnel (staircases)
should be no more than 2,5 m, and no less than 2,2 m. The air speed in the opening should be
no less than 1,3 m⋅s-1.
In case the tunnel ventilation system does not provide the mentioned parameters, the
pressurization ventilators should be applied in the vestibule with the air intake from the
surface to supply the air to the escalator tunnel (staircases). The pressurization ventilators
should be activated at the operation of the tunnel ventilation system in the exhaust mode only.
N o t e – In case the people evacuation outside in correspondence with the calculation should be finished
until the evacuation ways are blocked with dangerous factors of the fire in the station hall, the requirements to
the air flow parameters should not be considered.

5.16.5.5. The smogless tunnels adjacent to the station should be provided by creation of the
air flow in them toward the station with the speed no less than 0,5 m⋅s-1.
Page 99 of 295

5.16.5.6. The design static scheme of the station ventilation network should contain
structures and ventilators at the route section including the adjacent stations; for the
interchange station – adjacent station and sections of route to its adjacent stations.
At the calculations it is necessary to consider the availability of trains stopped in the
tunnels, and open position of the vestibule exit doors.
5.16.5.7. The air flow stability in the tunnels should be defined on the base of condition:
Vp > Vтр,
where Vр is the design air speed in the tunnel T the activation of the emergency ventilation
mode, m⋅s-1;
Vтр is the air speed in the tunnel required to prevent distribution of smoke toward the
ventilation flow, m⋅s-1.
The required air speed should be accepted by the Table 5.16.2.
T a b l e 5.16.2
Main line tunnel
Circular, 5,6 m internal diameter
The same, 5,1 m
Rectangular, single-line
The same, double-line

0
2,17
2,23
2,28
1,8

Required air speed, m⋅s-1
Slope of the tunnel, ‰
10
20
30
40
2,23
2,50
2,38
2,43
2,30
2,36
2,43
2,50
2,35
2,42
2,49
2,56
1,86
1,91
1,97
2,02

50
2,50
2,56
2,63
2,07

The design ventilation network scheme should include the route sections with no less than
three tunnel ventilation systems on the both sides of the emergency section of the tunnel.
For the route sections with more than 10 ‰ slopes it is recommended to provide the
scheme of separate aeration of the tunnels.
5.16.5.3. To increase the tunnel descentional ventilation stability, to create the «zero
ventilation mode» in the emergency sections and to prevent the penetration of smoke to the
station, as well as to provide the parameters of the smoke protection at the station, it is
recommended to arrange the prompt-erected ventilation brattice walls in the main line tunnels
providing the passage of evacuated people through them.
N o t e - Zero ventilation mode is the mode at which the air flow speed in the emergency section of the tunnel
does not exceed 0,5 m⋅s-1.

5.16.5.9. To evaluate the operating conditions of ventilators and other equipment at the fire
it is recommended to execute the thermo-physical calculations. The operating temperature
values in the conditions of fore should be no less than 150 °С for the station ventilation
system, and no less than 250 °С for the main line tunnel ventilation system. In such conditions
the operability of the tunnel ventilation system during 1 hour should be provided. It is
recommended to apply ventilators with removal of their drives from the gas flow.
5.16.5.10. The staircases doors should be equipped with facilities for auto-closing and seals
in the ledges, except for the bottom edge. The doors opening toward the staircases should not
decrease the design width of staircase platforms and flights of stairs in the open position. At
the placement of the doors closed in the operating conditions on the evacuation ways the
latches allowing opening the locks of closed doors without the key from inside should be
provided in them.
5.16.5.11. In the corridors of the service premises blocks with three or more levels the
smoke removal in the underground vestibules should be provided according to the SNiP 41-01.
The smoke removal ventilation installation should be placed at the high level.
5.16.5.12. The local ventilation systems of the machine rooms of escalators in the smoke
protection mode should provide the smoke removal to the ground surface. The consumption
of the removed air should be calculated on the provision of the negative pressure no less than
20 Pa in the machine room relating to the volume of the passenger area of the escalator
tunnel. The calculation should be executed on the base of conditions that the doors (hatch) of
the tension chamber, doors of machine room leading to the vestibule, and gates of the
Page 100 of 295

demounting shaft are closed.

5.16.6. Evacuation of people
5.16.6.1. The time period and ways of passengers’ evacuation from the station and from
the main line tunnels should be provided according to the SNiP 32-02.
5.16.6.2. For evacuation of people from the underground domestic and production
premises the following ways should be provided:
а) from the premises at the level of ticket hall of the vestibule – along the corridor, through
the ticket hall, under-street crossing or corridor up to the exit outside, as well as on the 2nd
type staircases and (or) escalator - to the station platform;
b) from the machine rooms of escalators - on the 2nd type staircases to the ticket (middle)
hall, or through the under-balustrade space and tension room – to the near-escalator area;
c) from the under-platform premises – along the corridor; 1st type staircases in the ends of
the corridor – to the station platform (it is allowed to use as the emergency exit);
N o t e – In case of location of premises with the area no more than 150 м2 in them the arrangement of one
evacuation and one emergency exit should be provided.

d) from the under-platform ventilation-and-cable ducts – through the 0,7×0,9 m hatch in
the end of the each duct, on the metal staircase – to the station platform;
e) from the premises at the level of the platform – along the corridors in the tunnels of the
st
1 and 2nd tracks, and along the corridors, service bridges (in the 1st and 2nd track tunnels) – to
the station platform;
f) from the premises at the levels between the ticket hall of the vestibule and shallow
station platforms - along the corridors, 1st type staircases, corridors to the ticket hall or to the
under-street crossing up to the exit outside, as well as along the corridors, 1st type staircases,
on the service bridges in the 1st and 2nd track tunnels – to the station platform and to the
tunnels;
g) from the premises of the 2nd floor of the rolling stock technical maintenance point in the
dead end (in case there are no more than 5 persons in them) - on the metal staircase, from the
1st floor premises – to the dead end tunnel (at the distance no more than 25 m), further along
the tunnels – to the station platform;
h) from the near-tunnel structures without continuous residence of people (working places)
– to the main line tunnel, further – to the station platform.
5.16.6.3. For evacuation of people from the domestic and production premises there should
be no less than two scattered evacuation exits.
It is allowed to provide one exit from the premises or structures indicated in the clause
5.16.6.2 (g, h), and one evacuation exit from the premises or structures indicated in the clause
2
5.16.6.2 (e, f) with the area up to 150 m , if the number of people in them does not exceed 5
persons.
5.16.6.4. The passage on the bridge to the tunnel from the production premises block to the
station platform should be accepted according to the clause 5.3.
5.16.6.5. The exit from the tension chamber of escalators to the lower pre-escalator area
should be provided on the vertical metal staircase through the 0,7×0,9 m hatch in the flooring.
It is allowed to install the inclined staircases with the angle of slope to horizon more than 75°.
5.16.6.6. At the places of re-formation of the people flows to the tunnel (in front of the
entrance to the connecting cross-passages and in the main line tunnel, at the places of
installation of equipment, between the track rails at the places of crossing through the contact
rail) the pedestrian footbridge (scaffolding) and stairs should be provided.
In front of the entrance to the cross-passages the length of the scaffolding should
correspond to the width of the cross-passage, but should be no less than 2 m, in front of the
entrance to the station – no less than 3 m.
At the places of installation of equipment the length of the scaffolding should be 2 m more
than the length of the equipment placement area.
The scaffolding should be provided from the materials, related to the НГ (nonPage 101 of 295

combustible), Г1 (combustible 1) or Г2 (combustible 2) groups.
5.16.6.7. The dangerous sections (places of installation of equipment, disruption of the
pedestrian path, etc) adjacent to the evacuation ways should be designated with the solid
white line having the width of 100 mm.
5.16.6.8. The placement of commercial areas adjacent to the evacuation ways from the
underground structures should not effect on the parameters of evacuation in any
circumstances, and safety of people in case of fire in the commercial areas should be
confirmed by calculation according to the clause 3.3 of the GOST 12.1.004.
5.16.6.9. The commercial areas, pavilions, cabinets, and other analogous objects of
associated service of the passengers should be divided to the groups consisting of no more
than 5 objects. The length of one group in the plan should not exceed 15 m. The fire safety
barriers with the fire-resistance rating no less than EI 45 should be provided between the
groups.
5.16.6.10. The equipment of the passenger conveyors, elevators, and lifting platforms for
disabled persons applied at the stations should correspond to the specially developed fire
safety requirements or technical conditionsм.
5.16.7. Electric power supply and control
5.16.7.1. In the 10KV networks at the connecting lead cable sleeves the special protective
metal fire-proof covers should be provided.
5.16.7.2. At the cable floors of the substations and, as a rule, in the ventilation-and-cable
ducts under the station platforms it is not allowed to install the connecting sleeves on the 10
KV cables. In case of placement of the connecting sleeve on the cable in the ventilation-andcable duct the fire-proof coating of all cables located above and below the sleeve at the
section of 2m length to the sleeve sides should be provided. The fire-proof coating should
correspond to the NPB 238.
5.16.7.3. In the each end of the station platform at the both tracks the plug-and-socket units
connected to the emergency lighting networks for connection of the lighting devices and
firefighting subdivisions’ tools with the total capacity of 3KW should be provided.
At the deep burial stations the line with plug-and-socket units near the upper and lower of
escalators consoles, and at the places of entrance to the main line tunnels from the platform
for connection of the firefighting subdivisions’ inter-communication facilities should be
provided.
The plug-and-socket units’ type should be accepted after the coordination with the
municipal firefighting services.
5.16.7.4. At the shallow stations the remote activation of the firefighting booster pump at
the input of the water pipelineа station, and simultaneous opening of the shut-off valve at the
bypass line should be provided from the station dispatcher point and from the fire cock
cabinets at the all levels of the station and in the dead ends.
At the deep burial stations the remote activation of the firefighting booster pump should be
provided from the fire hose cabinet in the vestibule, and opening of the shut-off valves at the
bypass line should be provided from the all fire cocks.
5.16.7.5. The flashing arrows of the evacuation ways should be connected to the
emergency lighting network.
5.17. Sanitary-and-hygiene
5.17.1. General provisions
5.17.1.1. The premises with continuous residence of people, technical facilities, and
equipment located at the one working place (in one premises or structure) should correspond
to the requirements of the technical aesthetics.
5.17.1.2. The technological equipment and facilities should be collapsible, should have the
systems of sound, light, or other warning alarm. Herewith the measures on reduction of
harmful effect of the man-triggered factors of physical, chemical, and biological nature on the
Page 102 of 295

workers and passengers to the allowable limits and concentrations in correspondence with
hygienic standards should be taken.
5.17.1.3. The measures on protection of the structures and premises from rodents and
insects should be taken according to the SP 3.5.3.1029.
5.17.2. Underground Railroad lines
5.17.2.1. The composition, structural and spatial-and-planning solutions by the passenger,
production, and domestic premises should provide the favorable and safety conditions of the
passengers transfer, execution of the contemporary ergonomic requirements to the schedules
of work and rest, and the personnel health protection.
It is not allowed to locate the premises with continuous residence of the personnel under
the machine rooms of escalators, near the escalators and tunnel ventilation installations.
The planning of the premises and elements of the interior should not disturb the ventilation
and air conditioning systems operation, create the dead-air spaces, prevent the pass, cause
injuries, decrease the illuminance of the surfaces, as well as should not accumulate the dust
and microorganisms.
5.17.2.2. The selection of the spatial-and-planning solutions and architectural-and-art
appearance of the interiors, selection of the sound-absorbing materials, acoustic calculations
should be executed according to the SNiP 23-03, Guidebook [5] and Manual [6].
5.17.2.3. The Materials used in the structures and at the interiors decoration should have
the sanitary-epidemiological conclusion, and should not emit the harmful chemical substances
to the air, soil, and ground waters in the amounts exceeding the effective maximum allowable
concentration for inhabited places. The elements of the interiors and decoration materials for
enclosing of the premises surface should be suitable for treatment with detergents,
disinfection, should be aesthetically expressive, and should not have specific odors.
5.17.2.4. At the entrances to the above-ground station vestibules the underfoot grids, area
of which should be defined taking into consideration the passenger flow should be provided,
and the pits under them should be equipped with facilities for heating, cleaning, and washing.
5.17.2.5. At the stations the places and containers for temporary storage of the used
mercury-containing electrical lamps, litter, and domestic wastes should be provided taking
into consideration the convenience of their loading and removal to the electric depot.
5.17.2.6. The only outside air exhaust from the structures and premises with potential
availability of harmful substances should be provided. Air relief cabinets should be located
according to the clause 5.8.1.
5.17.2.7. The ventilation cabinets, shafts, machine premises, air-ducts of the ventilation
systems where the dust can be accumulated should be equipped with facilities for the dust
collection or wash off.
The air ducts should have the doors, removable hatches, etc, allowing the air-ducts
cleaning. For the quickly contaminated elements of the air duct their cassette replacement
should be provided.
5.17.2.8. At the air conditioning systems with application of the air wetting and cooling by
the contact («wet») method the flowing pipeline water meeting the requirements of the
SaNPiN 2.1.4.1074 can only be used.
In the premises with continuous residence of the personnel the air recirculation is not
allowed.
5.17.2.9. The composition and location of the air quality automated control system sensors
should provide obtaining of the information regarding the status of the air media in the
passengers premises (platforms, station vestibules, interchange corridors), as well as in the
production and domestic premises with continuous residence of the personnel.
5.17.2.10. In the heating supply systems it is advisably to apply the heat and water
consumption electron automated control and regulatory systems.
The structure of the heating systems should provide the solutions preventing the
Page 103 of 295

accumulation of the dust and its thermal sublimation.
The calculation of the water supply for the domestic-and-drinking needs should be
conducted for the working shift with the biggest number of personnel. At the abrupt decrease
of the water consumption the measures on the prevention of the stagnant effects in the water
pipeline and deterioration of the water quality should be taken.
5.17.2.11. At the points of the drivers exchange, technical inspection of the rolling stocks,
premises of the substations, machine rooms of escalators, and in the ticket block the wash
basins should be provided; and in the lavatories – sections for the women’s hygiene.
5.17.3. Electric depot, administrative and production buildings
5.17.3.1. The spatial-and-planning solutions of the buildings, structures, and premises
should correspond to the SNiP 2.09.04 taking into consideration the sanitary characteristics and
groups of the production process.
5.17.3.2. The technological processes and operations accompanied by the harmful effect of
the chemical, physical, and biological factors (rail-motor car and locomotive shops,
compressor station, rolling stock washing, drying, and painting shops, point of assembling
and loading of containers with litter and wastes, etc) should be provided in the free-standing
buildings or sites, with taking the measures on the environmental protection.
5.17.3.3. The production premises using the aggressive liquids should be equipped with
installations for their neutralization. The industrial drainage systems should have treatment
facilities located up to the places of their discharge to the municipal drain-back system, and
should have the system of recycling water supply.
5.17.3.4. In case of harmful emissions to the air the measures providing the environmental
protection should be taken (elevation of the emissions level over the ground surface, removal
of them from the air intake facilities to the necessary distance, installation of the treatment
facilities, implementation of closed technological cycles, etc).
5.17.3.5. Technological processes of the rolling stock cleaning and washing should be
automated and isolated from environment. The chamber designated for these purposes should
be equipped with facilities for disinfection, outgassing and de-activation of cars, as well as
dust and other wastes collection systems.
5.17.3.6. The enclosing surface of the inspection pits at the tracks designated for repair of
the rolling stocks should be lined with materials cleaning of which from oils can be executed
using special detergents not adsorbing these oils.
5.17.3.7. The general exchange ventilation and air conditioning systems should not be
combined with the local exhaust and technological ventilation, as well as with local air
ejectors. The air and water recirculation in the general exchange ventilation systems is not
allowed.
All sections of the air and water circuits of the air ventilation and conditioning systems
should have technical opportunities (hatches, doors, etc) for periodical cleaning and
disinfection of their internal surfaces.
5.17.3.8. In the production and domestic premises with the continuous residence of people
the natural lighting and ventilation should be provided. The structural solutions of windows
should provide the necessary effectiveness of the natural ventilation and lighting in the
unfavorable weather conditions (snow, leaf fall, etc), as well as convenience of their cleaning
and wet cleaning.
5.17.3.9. In the production premises and covered crossings between the buildings located
in the regions with cold climatic conditions the additional heating (air and panel heating,
warm air curtains at the gates, floor heating, local electric calorifers, etc) preventing the sharp
temperature drops by vertical and horizontal and supporting the standard parameters of
microclimate, including the lowered relating to the floor level sections of buildings
(inspection pits, etc) should be provided.
5.17.3.10. The canteen in electric depot should be designed taking into account possibility
Page 104 of 295

of service of maximal number of the depot workers by no more than two shifts.
5.17.3.11. The wardrobes, shower rooms with foot baths, lavatories, wash basins, driers for
special clothes and footwear, mess, rest, and psycho-physiological relief premises, medical
centers should be provided in the production buildings.
5.17.3.12. In the administrative-and-production buildings according to the clause 5.23 the
domestic premises block should be provided, including:
- canteen or lunchroom;
- medical center and pharmaceutical cabinet;
- premises for the personnel rest and optimization of functional conditions;
- other domestic premises.
5.17.4. Radiation safety
5.17.4.1. The radiation-ecological works should be executed at the stages of researches,
construction, and before putting of the objects into operation according to the Table 5.17.1.
5.17.4.2. The radiation-ecological works should be executed by specialized organizations
having the corresponding authorizations (licenses).
The construction works at the dumps, former sewage farms, at the sections with the filled
ground should be started after the proper researches of radiation safety only, taking into
consideration the possible man-triggered radiation pollution.
In case of revelation of radiation pollutions of soils and grounds the questions concerning
the necessity of further researches, possibility of construction in this region, and taking of
corresponding preventive measures should be settled separately with participation of the State
Sanitary and Epidemiological Surveillance Department authorities.
T a b l e 5.17.1
Stage of works
Pre-project and
project researches

Construction

Putting of object
into operation

Designation of works
Obtaining the initial data for taking
decisions regarding the
radiological suitability of the
building area
Evaluation of the real radiation
hazard in the open pits and tunnels,
construction materials

Evaluated indices
Equivalent dose rate of the external gamma-radiation in
the construction region; specific effective activity of the
natural radio nuclides in the ground samples; density of
the radon flow from the soil
Equivalent dose rate of the external gamma-radiation in
the pits and tunnels; weighted average by the area
density of the radon flow in the pits and tunnels;
specific effective activity of the radio nuclides in the
construction materials
Check of correspondence of the
Equivalent dose rate of the gamma-radiation in the
real radiological parameters in the structures and at the territories; weighted average by the
structures and at the Underground area density of the radon flow inside the structures;
Railroad territory to the radiation equivalent balanced volume activity of radon (annual
safety standards
average) inside the structures

The results of the radiation-ecological works should be reflected in the technical reports
containing the analysis of results of radiological measurements at the stages according to the
Table 5.17.1 and in the corresponding conclusions.
5.18. Environmental protection
The measures on the environmental protection should be developed on the base of data of
engineering-and-geological and engineering-and-ecological researches according to the
clauses 4.1 and 4.3, fund materials, ecological cards, and SNiP 23-01.
5.18.1. Environmental air
5.18.1.1. For the constructed objects and structures being the sources of atmospheric air
pollutions the changes in the general climatic conditions in the construction region, its
microclimatic changes under the effect of local underlying surface factors should be
evaluated, the possible negative derangements of chemical composition, insolation, humidity
and wind conditions should be prognosticated.
The general climatic conditions (temperature and relative humidity of the air, precipitations
and wind conditions) should be evaluated by the data of the local meteorological stations and
according to the SNiP 23-01.
Page 105 of 295

The microclimatic evaluation should be conducted taking into consideration the terrain
topography, microclimatic investigations of the territory and regularities of change of
meteorological elements depending on the conditions of the underlying surface in
correspondence with the Methodical instructions [11].
5.18.1.2. At the location of electric depot, boiler rooms, carpenter shops, electro-deposition
sites, etc, at the territories characterizing with high air pollution index, the dimensions of the
sanitary-protective area defined by the sanitary classification of the given production in case
of its relation to the V class of harmful conditions should be increased.
5.18.1.3. In the electric depot the emissions of harmful substances from the accumulator
washing and filling sites, electroplating baths, painting chambers, welding, etc, should be
classified by their relation to the maximum permissible emissions.
5.18.1.4. The measures on the atmospheric air protection should be taken according to the
SanPiN 2.1.6.1032 and Instructions OND (general normative documentation)-1.
5.18.2. Water objects
5.18.2.1. The design hydrological characteristics of the water object at the selection of type
of its crossing should be accepted according to the SP 33-101.
At the laying of the line sections in the water conservation districts (bands) and in the
water objects it is necessary to apply the Statement [13].
5.18.2.2. In the structures and at the enterprises with big water consumption for technical
needs the local or common circulation water systems and in-plant recycling of the pure and
treated to standard quality industrial effluent should be used. The composition of treatment
plants and degree of the water treatment should correspond to the SNiP 2.04.03, herewith the
treatment degree by the weighted substances should compile 3 - 5 mg/l, by the petroleum
products - 0,3 - 1,0 mg/l.
5.18.2.3. The discharge of wastes from the structures and enterprises to the water objects
should be provided in correspondence with the GOST 17.1.3.13 and SanPiN № 4630.
5.18.3. Green plantings
5.18.3.1. The measures on the environmental protection and compensation should be
developed taking into consideration the minimal removal of the green plantings. The
relocation of trees should be provided in correspondence with the green plantings tally sheet.
The new plantings should be set in correspondence with the landscaping and site finishing
plan in the construction area and taking into consideration the depth of the structures’
bedding.
5.18.3.2. At the analysis of the currently existing green plantings their conditions and
species composition should be reflected. The green plantings’ conditions should be evaluated
by the degradation factor:
а) high degraded –more than 50 % of the tree and bush crowns is damaged, the herbaceous
cover is overgrazed at the more than 20 % of territory - V stage of digression;
б) average degraded - the trees crown is 25 - 50 % damaged, the herbaceous cover is
overgrazed at 5 - 20 % of territory - III and IV stages of digression;
в) low degraded - the trees crown damage does not exceed 25 %, the herbaceous cover is
overgrazed at the area no more than 5 % of the territory - I and II stages of digression.
The number of tree and bush species subjected to cutting-down, relocation and saving
should be defined by the green plantings conditions.
5.18.3.3. The activities on the landscaping and site finishing should be developed in case
the sites designated for landscaping within the electric depot territory compile no less than 10
- 15 % of its area.
The green planting area of the sanitary-protective zone of electric depot should compile no
less than 60 % of its area; along the border with residential area the band of tree and bush
plantings with the width no less than 20 m should be provided.
It is recommended to execute the landscaping of territories in front of the entrance to the
Page 106 of 295

stations in the form of bush square with the height of bushes no more than 0,5 m.
The landscaping type should be accepted depending on the thickness of the ground over
the underground structures. At the thickness of the ground less than 1,5 covered with the
vegetative ground layer no less than 20 cm the lawns with flowers and bushes having the
shallow root system should predominate in the landscaping; at the thickness of the ground
more than 1,5 m covered with the vegetative ground layer no less than 50 cm the tree and
bush species with different root system can be planted.
5.18.3.4. At the territories adjacent to the above-ground objects of the Underground
Railroad (electric depot, administrative and production buildings, ventilation cabinets), the
landscaping methods providing the good territory aeration conditions and its protection from
harmful emissions should be applied.
The green plantings should be filtering type plantings with blown structure.
5.18.3.5. The landscaping and site finishing works should be conducted in favorable for
these works time period.
5.18.4. Geological environment
5.18.4.1. The engineering-and-technical activities on the provision of stability of the
geological environment, buildings and structures in the conditions of dangerous engineeringand-geological processes should be developed according to the SNiP 2.02.01, SNiP 2.06.15, and
SNiP 22-02. Herewith it is necessary to:
- evaluate the characteristics of the current conditions of the geological environment by its
main components;
- give the analysis of project solutions and prognosis of the geological environment
components’ change taking into consideration the existing and design man-triggered loads on
the environment;
- develop the basic directions of the geological environment protection from the possible
negative man-triggered processes on the base of structural and technological characteristics of
the structures, depth of their bedding, conditions of their construction and operation.
Evaluation should be conducted on the base of materials of engineering-and-geological and
hydro-geological researches.
In the prognosis of the geological environment components’ change the dynamics of
change of regime and underground waters pollution, stress conditions of the ground mass, and
activation of the engineering-and- geological processes should be considered. In the difficult
engineering-and-geological conditions the prognosis should be executed by the mathematic
simulation methods.
5.18.4.2. The degree of the underground waters protection from the pollutions should be
defined by the Methodology [3].
The territories should be divided to the following categories by the underground waters
protection degree:
а) I category – favorable conditions of protection with high level of safety. In the confining
layer of the water-bearing stratums the clays with the thickness more than 10 m, or или
argillo-arenaceous rocks with total thickness more than 100 m underlay;
б) II category – relatively favorable conditions with relative degree оf safety. In the
confining layer of the water-bearing stratums the clays with the thickness more than 3 m, but
less than 10 m, and argillo-arenaceous rocks with the thickness more than 50 m, but less than
100 m underlay;
в) III category - unfavorable conditions of protection with low level of safety. In the
confining layer of the water-bearing stratums the clays with the thickness less than 3 м, and
argillo-arenaceous rocks with the thickness less than 50 m underlay.
5.18.5. Soils
5.18.5.1. The evaluation of the soil cover conditions at the cut-and-cover method of
construction of the underground structures and construction of above ground structures should
Page 107 of 295

be conducted by the geo-chemical composition of soils, chemical pollutions degree, and
sanitary conditions according to the GOST 17.4.2.01 and GOST 17.4.3.06.
5.18.5.2. The ecological conditions of soils depending on the soils pollution degree should
be defined on the base of the total concentration index (TCI) of abnormal chemical elements
(zinc, cadmium, lead, mercury, copper, cobalt, nickel, arsenic) according to the Table 5.18.1.
T a b l e 5.18.1
TCI value
Less than 16
16 - 32
32 - 128
More than 128

Pollution degree
Low
Average
High
Maximum

Pollution category
Allowable
Moderately dangerous
Dangerous
Heavily dangerous

Evaluation of the ecological situation
Relatively satisfactory
Stressed and critical
Crisis
Catastrophic

The possibility of use of mellow layer of soils should be defined depending on the TCI:
а) less than 32 – the soils can be used for restoration (recultivation) of the damaged
grounds, as well as for the landscaping and site finishing of the construction area;
б) from 32 to 128 - the soils can be used for recultivation and site finishing at their dilution
by the ecologically pure ground;
в) more than 128 - the soils cannot be used and should be removed to the special landfills
with the purpose of their further burial.
5.18.6. Solid wastes
5.18.6.1. At the designing the volumes and composition of the grounds extracted during
the construction of the above ground and underground structures should be revealed, and the
possibility of their usage as the backfilling structures, or necessity of their removal to the
places assigned by the city administration should be defined.
5.18.6.2. The places of collection and accumulation of any kinds of wastes should
correspond to the Regulations [4], should be equipped and located so that not to effect
negatively on the environmental conditions, structures, and people health.
5.18.6.3. In the electric depot or at the other sites of the Underground Railroad the
installations for dewatering of sediments extracted from the dirt collectors of the water
treatment facilities and pumping plants, and for combustion of solid wastes should be
provided.
5.18.6.4. At the sites of wastes collection, and within the area of their effect on the
environment the activities on monitoring of the environmental conditions in the order
established by the federal executive power authorities in the sphere of the wastes handling in
correspondence with their competence should be conducted.
5.18.7. Historical and cultural monuments
5.18.7.1. At the designing the possibility of any negative effect on the historical and
cultural monuments should be excluded. Where appropriate, the activities on their save as
during the construction period, as during the process of the Underground Railroad operation
should be developed.
5.18.7.2. Evaluation of the monuments condition should be conducted on the base of the
following data:
- investigation of conditions of the above-ground bearing structures taking into
consideration possible effect of the vibration loads on them;
- deformational floor-by-floor photography including the fissures’ parameters fixation,
installation of markers or special registration marks on the fissures for measurement of
deformations using the indicators;
- regarding the deformations and settlements of monuments during the last years;
- investigation of the foundations, wooden piles, sills, ancient drainage structures, and
wells’ conditions; herewith the special attention should be paid to the wooden structures,
piles, and sills integrity;
- Engineering, hydro-geological, and paleogeodynamical conditions that can effect on the
monuments’ conditions;
Page 108 of 295

- regarding the possible effect of long-term dewatering, frost retreat of the grounds,
especially argillic, at their artificial freezing, vibration loads on the monuments.
5.18.7.3. The activities in the engineering protection of monuments should be developed
according to the SNiP 22-02 on the base of:
- results of the engineering-and-geological and engineering-and-geodesic researches and
observations;
- data characterizing the specifics of historical territories (burial mounds, embankments,
graffs, burial grounds, cultural layers, etc), monument buildings and structures located at the
route;
- variant solutions on the methods of construction of the underground and above ground
structures;
- data regarding the allowable deformations and settlements of monuments;
- technical-and-economic comparison of variants of project solutions on the engineering
protection.
5.18.7.4. The technical assignment given by the customer for elaboration of the project
documentation on the construction of tunnels within the protected zone with the historical and
cultural monuments should contain the data of evaluation the expected effect of the
construction on the geological environment according to the SNiP 22-01.
5.18.7.5. Elaboration of the project documentation on the reconstruction of the
Underground Railroad stations being the historical monuments should be executed taking into
consideration the results of technical investigation of the structures conducted by the detailed
program.
5.19. Protection of municipal facilities from the noiseа, vibration, and ground currents
5.19.1. Protection from noiseа and vibration
5.19.1.1. The acoustic calculation of the expected level of noise at the territory of
residential area, as well as selection and evaluation of the anti-noise activities should be
executed according to the SP 23-104.
5.19.1.2. The calculation of level of the tunnel linings vibration from the train traffic,
distribution of oscillation from the tunnels to the buildings, as well as selection and
calculation of the anti-vibration facilities should be executed according to the SP 23-105.
5.19.1.3. The sections of tunnels where the anti-vibration structures are used (vibration
protected sections) should meet the following requirements:
- The length of the vibration protected section and its location in the plan should be defined
by calculation according to the SP 23-105;
- between the ordinary and anti-vibration structures there should be the transition sections
having the length no less than 10 m with smooth change of the physical-and-mechanical
characteristics.
5.19.2. Protection from ground currents
5.19.2.1. In case of combination of the Underground Railroad facilities (such as stations or
electric depot) with the other designation facilities their internal metal structures, earthing
devices, and reinforcement bars of the reinforced concrete structures should be executed
separately, and should not have galvanic couplings. The structures feeding of which is
provided from the Underground Railroad substations can be an exception. In this case the
requirements corresponding to the present regulations should be related to these structures in
the sphere of measures taken on the restriction of the ground currents.
5.19.2.2. It is advisable to lay the municipal cables at the sections located near the
Underground Railroad lines in the cable blocks, or to apply cables in non-metal sheath.
5.19.2.3. At the simultaneous laying on the bridge (overhead road) the Underground
Railroad tracks and railroad or tram lines the facilities and structures of the Underground
Railroad (rails, cables, pipelines, etc) should not have metal connections with the railroad or
tram structures, cables, pipelines, etc.
Page 109 of 295

5.19.2.4. At the places of close approach in the plan (up to 50 m) and at the places of
crossing of the shallow Underground Railroad tunnels with tram or electrified railroad lines
the reinforced concrete lining of the tunnels should have external reinforced protective and
electrically insulated coating. At the places of crossing the reinforced protective and
electrically insulated coating should be laid directly under the tram or railroad tracks, and at
the distance of 50 m on the both sides from them.
5.20. Protection of structures from aggressive media effect
5.20.1. The development of the construction structures corrosion protection measures
should be executed according to the SNiP 2.03.11 on the base of evaluation of hazard from the
aggressive effect of media.
The initial data on the aggressive effect should be accepted by the materials of the
engineering-and-geological and engineering-and-ecological researches at the line route, data
on the atmospheric air pollutions, as well as on the base of experience in the operation of the
construction structures in analogous conditions.
5.20.2. The methods of the construction structures, facilities, and devices protection,
should be selected on the base of evaluation of the aggressive effect of media on the materials
and structures according to the Table 5.20.1, and requirements to their primary or secondary
protection.
T a b l e 5.20.1
Aggressive effect degree according to the SNiP
2.03.11
Media
On the concrete and
On the cast iron and
reinforced concrete
steel
Aggressive grounds
Table 4
Table 28
Aggressive ground waters
» 5, 6, 7
» 26, 27
Oils and petroleum products
»8
» 27, 32
Solutions of the chloride-containing salts of defrosters
» 4, 5, 7
» 25, 26
Acid and alkali aerosols
»5
» 26
Aggressive gases of the environmental air
»2
» 24
Biogeneous
» 2, 5, 8
» 24, 26
N o t e – In the biogeneous media the attribute of hazard of the microbiological corrosion of the structures is
the presence in the media (ground, ground water) sulfate-reducing, thionic, and nitrifying bacteria. The
mentioned bacteria at the content of 106 units in 1 g of the ground or water can cause the strong damage of the
construction materials.

5.20.3. The calculation of the reinforced concrete structures of the underground facilities
subjected to the aggressive media effect should be executed taking into consideration the
requirements to the cracking resistance and maximum allowable width of the long-term crack
opening according to the Table 5.20.2.
5.20.4. The minimal design marks of concrete by the freeze-thaw durability of the
reinforced concrete structures designated for operation in the conditions of temperature-andhumidity action of the environmental air should be selected depending on the climatic
conditions of the construction region and conditions of wetting of the structural elements by
the water of atmospheric precipitations according to the Table 5.20.3.
T a b l e 5.20.2
Requirements to the Category by the
cracking resistance (over the line) and
maximum allowable width of the longterm crack opening, mm, (under the line)
Degree of the media
for the structures contacting with ground
aggressive effect
In the area of watering
In the area of
with the waterwatering without
proofing and in the
the water-proofing
non-watering area*
Non-aggressive
1/3/0,20
Low aggressive
1/3/0,15

Mark of the concrete by the
Thickness
water-proofing, no less than
of the
protective
In the area of
layer from
In the area of
watering with
the side of
watering
the watercontact with
without the
proofing and in
the
water-proofing the non-watering
ground**,
area*
mm
30
W8
W6
30
W8
W6
Page 110 of 295

Requirements to the Category by the
Mark of the concrete by the
Thickness
cracking resistance (over the line) and
water-proofing, no less than
of the
maximum allowable width of the longprotective
In the area of
term crack opening, mm, (under the line) layer from
Degree of the media
In the area of
watering with
for the structures contacting with ground the side of
aggressive effect
watering
the waterIn the area of watering contact with
In the area of
without the
proofing and in
the
with the waterwatering without
water-proofing the non-watering
ground**,
proofing and in the
the water-proofing
area*
*
mm
non-watering area
Medium aggressive
1/3/0,10
35
W10
W8
High aggressive
1/2/0,10
35
W12
W8
*
Related to the structures with the 1st group reinforcing steel according to the SNiP 2.03.11.
**
At the application of the shotcreting the thickness of the protective layer can be decreased by 10 mm.

T a b l e 5.20.3
Above-ground structures at the open air
Underground
Climatic conditions with the average
structures in the area
monthly temperature in the coldest
of freezing,
Contacting contacting
Under the
month, °С, according to the SNiP 23Without tent
contacting with
with water with ground
tent
01
ground
Moderate, minus 10 and more
200
150
100
75
100
Harsh, below minus 10 to minus
300
200
150
100
150
минус 20 including
Extremely harsh, below minus 20
400
300
200
150
200

For the structures contacting with strongly mineralized waters containing the salts in the
amount of more than 1 mass.%, saline soils, solutions of defrosting salts, and subjected to
periodical freezing and defrosting, the mark of the concrete by the freeze-thaw durability
should be selected and controlled as for the concrete road carpets according to the GOST
10060.0.
5.20.5. At the sections located in the areas subjected to the effect of aggressive media
primarily the following measures on the reduction of aggressive effect should be taken:
- At the construction by the cut-and-cover method at the territories polluted with aggressive
substances (old dumps, aeration fields, industrial enterprises sites polluted with different
technical products) in case of substantiation replacement of the polluted ground with pure
one, and neutralization of the aggressive substances with additives to the ground should be
applied. Where appropriate, the screens from the bentonite clays, walls in the ground,
drainage, etc should be used, the ground pollution sources (chemical productions, storages,
refueling stations, etc) should be removed from the Underground Railroad route beyond the
area of their distribution;
- At the construction by the closed method at the sections with the ground containing
sulfides (pyrite, marcasite), as well as sulfate-reducing, thionic, and nitrifying bacteria, where
possible, the application of the caisson method of the tunneling should be excluded, or special
measures on the construction structures protection from the aggressive effect should be taken;
- The underground structures should be protected from the surface, ground and other kinds
of water using:
а) water-proofing;
б) water-proof and corrosion-resistant materials of linings;
в) injection of special solutions under the lining;
г) pressurization of joints between the elements of pre-fabricated linings and isolation
joints, as well as openings for injection of the solution and for bolted joints;
- laying of the oil, petroleum, and other pipelines, transporting the aggressive chemical
products within the territories assigned as the construction area should not be allowed. It is
allowed to cross the line route by the oil and petroleum pipelines after taking measures
preventing the petroleum products penetration to the ground in case of their damage within
the indicated area;
Page 111 of 295

- The materials for the structures and facilities, as well as for protection from the corrosion
should be selected taking into consideration their resistance to the aggressive media effect.
5.20.6. The character of the contact and conditions of the aggressive media and
temperature-and-humidity effect on the construction structures should be accepted by the
Table 5.20.4.
T a b l e 5.20.4
Character
Aggressive media
Effects
of contact
Relative
of the
ManSolutions Aggressive
humidity
Structure structural
aggressive
Oils and
Aggressive
triggered
of
gases, acid
of the air Atmospheric temperature
premises
elements
ground
petroleum
Biogeneous
grounds
ground
defrosting and alkali
more precipitations below 0 °С
with
waters
products
waters
salts
aerosols
than 75
aggressive
%
media
Deep burial Contacting
+
+
+
+
+
structure
with
ground
Inside the
+
+
+
premises
Shallow
Contacting
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
structure
with
ground
Inside the
+
+
+
+
premises
AboveContacting
+
+
+
+
+
+
ground
with
structure,
ground
closed
Inside the
+
+
+
station
premises
Staircases at Contacting
+
+
+
+
+
+
the entrance with
to
the ground
underground At
the
+
+
+
+
station
open air
vestibule
The same,
+
+
+
under the
tent
Bridge,
Contacting
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
overhead
with
road,
ground
supporting Contacting
+
+
wall, tunnel with water
portal
At
the
+
+
+
+
+
+
open air
Accumulator Inside the
+
room
premises
Fuel
and Contacting
+
+
+
+
+
+
lubricating with
materials
ground
storage
Inside the
+
+
+
premises
Ventilation At
the
+
+
+
+
cabinet
open air

5.20.7. For protection of the underground structures from the side of contact with
aggressive ground and ground waters the following methods should be provided (one of them
or combination of several methods):
- coating with the layer of slurry or combo solutions;
- sticking insulation with sheet or rolled materials;
Page 112 of 295

- back-coating or soaking;
- metallization of steel elements with zinc or aluminum, additional treatment of polymeric
materials;
- cathodic protection.
Selection of the type of insulation and chemical resistance of some materials are
represented in the Appendices 5.20А and 5.20B.
5.20.8. The measures on protection of the external surfaces of the tunnel structures should
be assigned depending on the method of execution of works (closed or cut-and-cover) and
types of lining (pre-fabricated from the cast iron, concrete, or reinforced concrete elements,
cast-in-situ, or pressed cast-in-situ concrete lining).
The examples of protection of the tunnel structures are represented in the Appendix 5.20C.
5.20.9. The slurry and combo solution, inserted on the surface as the insulating layer
should have the close structure (water impermeability no less than W6) and should be
corrosion resistant to aggressive media effect. The corrosion resistance should be reached by
means of application of corresponding kinds of cement, fillers, chemical additives, taking into
consideration the requirements of the SNiP 2.03.11.
5.20.10. In the underground structures constructed by the cut-and-cover method the glued
insulation by the sheet and rolled materials should be applied in general as the water-proofing,
and in case of presence of medium and high aggressive media as the chemical resistant
insulating materials protecting the structure from the media effect.
The water-proof coatings can simultaneously be applied as anti-corrosion protection if they
have the necessary chemical resistance and bio-resistance to the specific aggressive media.
The sheet and rolled insulation should be executed with provision of denseness and
impermeability for liquids.
Arrangement of glued water-proofing by the method of melting of the rolled materials
should be provided according to the technical documentation on the given method, for the
other water-proofing methods – according to the Technical Conditions of their application.
5.20.11. At the application of the water-proofing preliminary inserted on the surface of prefabricated elements of lining the impermeability and resistance equal to the preliminary
inserted water-proofing should be provided in the joints of the pre-fabricated elements.
5.20.12. The external insulation should be protected from the mechanical damage. To
prevent the breaking of the glued insulation at the places of insulation joints the compensators
should be provided.
5.20.13. The back-coatings (bitumen, goudron, bitumen-polymeric, epoxy, epoxy-furan,
epoxy-slate, etc) for protection of the underground structure surfaces should be applied taking
into consideration their resistance to the aggressive media effect. The thickness of the bitumen
coatings should be equal to 3 - 8 mm, asphalt-and-concrete - 10 - 15 mm. For reinforcement
of the bitumen and asphalt coatings the fiberglass mesh or fiberglass cloth should be used.
In the grounds and ground waters polluted with organic substances (oils, petroleum
products, detergents) application of protective rolled, sheet, back-coating materials, as well as
pressurizing compositions on the base of bitumen is not allowed.
5.20.14. Protection of the surface of metal elements inaccessible for restoration of the
protective coatings should be provided using the effective long-term anti-corrosion coatings
(such as tread metallization-polymeric coatings including the metallization aluminum coating
inserted on the zinc under-layer with subsequent soaking with layer of chemical-resistant
varnish). To prevent the damage of anti-corrosion coatings at the welding it is recommended
to execute the elements fastening using the bolted joints protected from the corrosion.
5.20.15. Protection of the structures from the bio-corrosion should be provided using the
chemical-resistant and biological resistant polymeric materials applied for the high-aggressive
gases and liquids, according to the Tables 13 and 29 of the SNiP 2.03.11.
5.20.16. The external surfaces of pre-fabricated elements of structures (from the cast iron,
Page 113 of 295

concrete and reinforced concrete) contacting with ground and ground waters should be
preferably protected in the factory conditions by insertion of the glued insulation from the
sheet or rolled materials, soaking, or hydrophobization.
The external surfaces of structures located in the sandy grounds or running sands, as well
as at the places where the protection by injection of the combo is impossible, should be
strongly protected from the aggressive media effect (for example, with coating of the ХБЗГ-2
type according to the Appendix 5.20D).
5.20.17. It is recommended to coat the internal surface of the cast iron liners and steel
structures at the stations, in the near-station structures, in the main line tunnels, and in the
near-tunnel structures with non-flammable anti-corrosion compositions, primarily cement and
cement-polymeric in case of presence of aggressive media. It is allowed also to apply the
back-coating insulation on the base of synthetic resins (epoxy, furan, polyurethane).
It is recommended to protect the edges of the cast iron liners (gaps at the connection
places) with hydrocarbon greases (petrolatum, technical vaseline) with improving additives
(oxidized petrolatum, rubber) and inhibitors (Appendix 5.20D) in addition to the existing
methods of the water-proofing and protection from the crevice corrosion.
To prevent the leakages and connected with them crevice corrosion of the cast iron liners
the joints in the cast-iron linings should be calked with lead or sealed with elastic rubber
neoprene gaskets.
Bolted holes and openings for injection should be sealed by means of using of washers and
rings made from corrosion-resistant materials.
Joints in the pre-fabricated reinforced concrete linings calked with expanded cement
advisably should be coated with epoxy, polyurethane, or other resistant back-coatings.
5.21. Protection of the Underground Railroad facilities and devices from ground
currents corrosion
5.21.1. Measures on restriction of the ground currents should be provided in the
corresponding sections of the project documentation.
5.21.2. At the arrangement of the track the following should be provided:
- electrical insulation of the track rails laid on the reinforced concrete cross-ties or on any
other similar foundation by means of installation of insulating elements (gaskets, bushes) at
the places of connection of details being under the rail voltage with the surface of concrete,
reinforcement bars, etc;
- the gap no less than 50 mm between the track rails, detail of the rail fastenings and track
concrete or broken stone ballast, as well as pipelines, cables, electrical equipment enclosures,
and other grounded structures;
- electrical isolation of the metal parts of the point operating gears connected to the track
rails from the broken stone ballast or track concrete and tunnel linings;
- soaking of the wooden cross-ties and screw holes in them with antiseptics not conducting
the electric current. The wood screw holes should not be through;
- laying of the track rails on the metal or reinforced concrete overpasses and metro-bridges,
as well as at the distance of 200 m on the both sides from them on the wooden cross-ties with
insulating gaskets and bushes in the rail fastenings (rubber, polyethylene, or other polymeric
materials);
- two insulating joints at the each track rail between the electrified and non-electrified
tracks at the distance excluding the possibility of their simultaneous overlapping by the rolling
stock;
- single insulating joints at the bumping posts;
- exclusion of the possibility of contact between the rails of the by-kilometer rail stock in
the tunnel and any metal elements of the superstructure;
- utilization of amortizing structural elements of the superstructure preventing the decrease
of the transient resistance between the rails and tunnel linings;
Page 114 of 295

- location of the anchor bolts fastening the longitudinal bars to the reinforced concrete rail
seat between the tie plates;
- utilization of the factory manufactured inventory electrical connectors for the prefabricated joints of the track rails and track switches.
The specific transient resistance between the track rail of one track (two rail strings in
parallel) and lining (ground) should be no less, Ohm⋅km:
а) in the tunnels and closed above ground sections, at the sections adjacent to the metrobridges (up to 200 m on the both sides from the bridge), - 1,5;
б) on the overpasses, metro-bridges and in the electric depot buildings - 3;
в) at the parking tracks of the electric depot, at the open above ground sections - 0,5.
5.21.3. In the construction structures of the tunnel linings should be provided:
- galvanic separation of longitudinal metal connections of reinforcement bars of the
reinforced concrete linings with the step no more than 60 m. The places of reinforcement bars
separation should be marked with vertical white line inserted on the internal side of the
linings;
- shunting of the sections of linings (insertions) from the concrete or reinforced concrete in
the tunnels with lining from the cast iron liners, combined lining from the cast iron liners and
reinforced concrete blocks, and steel-and-concrete lining with the steel bus having the crosssection no less than 160 mm2;
- the methods of connection of the reinforced concrete liners (blocks), as well as nodes of
attachment of earthing buses, hangers, etc, to them, excluding the possibility of galvanic
couplings with reinforcement bars and its integration into the long continuous metal network.
5.21.4. In the power supply facilities should be provided:
- sectioning of the positive and negative buses of the 825V switchboard in case of
necessity of feeding of the traction networks of different lines at the places of their close
approach or crossing from one TSS;
- protection of the conducting parts of the 825V contact network facilities from the ground
short-circuit;
- application of the inter-track rail bonds in the middle part of the run and, where
appropriate, no less than in every 500 m between them.
Connection of the negative boosting mains and inter-track rail bonds to the track rails of
the main line tracks should be executed in correspondence with the clause 5.12.
The electrical resistance of the inter-track rail bonds to the direct current should be no more
than 3 ⋅ 10-3 Ohm.
5.21.5. The water pipeline section laid under the track rails should be separated from the
other part of network by the insulating flanges.
5.21.6. The cables and pipelines at the places of their exit from the Underground Railroad
facilities should be provided, correspondingly, with insulating sleeves and flanges located in
the Underground Railroad facilities at the dry, accessible for inspection places.
At the section from the insulating sleeve and flange to the place of the exit the cables and
pipelines should be isolated from the surrounding supporting and construction structures with
rubber or polyethylene gaskets.
5.21.7. The electrical resistance of the current-conducting joints of the track rails and track
switches should not exceed the resistance of the whole rail section with the length 1 m, and
isolating joints with impedance bonds with secondary windings - 36 m.
5.21.8. At the ends of the metro-bridges and overpasses having the length more than 300
the fuse links with non-metal sheathes should be provided at the cable lines, and the pipe
spools made from the composite materials should be provided in the pipelines.
5.21.9. The control instrumentation point (CIP I) should be applied for measurement of
the track rails potential relating to the earthing conductor (bus); the CIP II should be applied
for measurement of potentials of cast-iron linings or reinforcement bars of the reinforced
Page 115 of 295

concrete linings relating to the ambient (for the lining) environment.
5.21.10. The CIP I should be installed near the IB (Impedance bond with secondary
windings):
- at the ends of the bridge and overpass;
- in the each main line tunnel in 500 – 800 m;
- at the places of connection of negative boosting mains or inter-track rail bonds (at one of
the tracks) to the IB.
5.21.11. The CIP II should be installed in the main line tunnels with cast-iron lining at the
sections of Underground Railroad routes crossing with the tram routes or with the routes of
DC electrified railroads, and at the sections where these lines have the parallel routes.
The CIP II should be applied in the tunnels with reinforced concrete lining as well, in case
of revelation of multiple connection of the lining reinforcement bars with grounded structures,
pipeline fastening points, etc.
At the sections of routes crossing the CIP II should be installed in one of the tunnels near
the crossing, and on the both sides from it at the distance of 200 m.
At the section of parallel routes the CIP II should be installed at the ends of the tunnel
section located close to the tram or railroad tracks, as well as in 300 m at the distance between
the routes less than 100m, and in 500m at the distance from 100m to 200m.
In case of the traction substation and tram or railroad located in the indicated areas one of
the CIP II should be located close to the negative boosting point of this substation.
The CIP II should be located also in the tunnels constructed in the aggressive media.
5.21.12. In case the places of installation of the CIP I and the CIP II come together the CIP
II installation should be provided only.
5.21.13. The CIP I consists of three-pole breaker and connecting terminals installed in the
box; the CIP II consists of the CIP I and measuring electrode installed in the tunnel lining.
Both the CIP I and the CIP II should be connected by cables with the terminal cabinets
located at the stations. The input of 220 VAC should be provided in the cabinets.
5.21.14. At the TSS installation of the device (volt-hours counter) for measurement of
average daily -825V bus potentials relating to the earthing device of the substation should be
provided.
5.21.15. The control of execution and effectiveness of measures on the protection from the
electrical corrosion during the construction and commissioning of the lines should be
executed according to the Appendix 7.3Ж.
5.21.16. Development of additional technical solutions on the restriction of the ground
currents and protection of structures from the electrical corrosion should be executed, where
appropriate, on the base of measurements of the ground currents during the first period of the
line operation.
5.22. Security alarm system
5.22.1 The following positions should be equipped with the automated security alarm
system:
- Passenger entrances to the station vestibules;
- production entrances to the Underground Railroad structures from the ground surface:
ventilation cabinets, tunnel portals, emergency exits;
- entrances to the main line tunnels from the station platform;
- production premises: substations, machine rooms of escalators, equipment, relay, and
switch rooms, medical centers;
- ticket block premises: fare collecting operator room, senior fare collector room, money
computation room, senior operator of Automated Fare Payment System (AFPS) and server
room.
The entrances to the ticket block premises, machine rooms of escalators, medical centers,
and substations should be equipped with the access control facilities.
Page 116 of 295

The list of premises subjected to installation of security alarm system and access control
facilities should be corrected in the design assignment.
5.22.2. The Automated Security Alarm (ASA) receiving-and-control instrumentation
should be installed in the Station Dispatcher Point (SDP) and in the ticket block premises – At
the senior cash operator with output of the signal to the SDP and police post.
The information regarding the ASA activation should be transmitted to the fire safety and
police dispatcher point by the telecommunication network.
5.22.3. In the premises of the fare collecting operator, senior cash operator, and ticket
block server the double-boundary ASA, and in other premises the single-boundary ASA
should be provided.
For the single-boundary ASA, as a rule, the magnetic alarm contacts for locking of the
entrance doors, and other apertures on opening should be provided. In the above-ground
vestibules the windows should also be locked (on the penetration or opening).
For the second boundary of protection locking the certain areas of premises the 2D or 3D
electro-optical annunciators should be applied.
5.22.4. In the ticket room, medical center, SDP, SDP booth at the platformе the hidden
button and pedal should be provided for transmission of the alarm signal to the ASA
receiving-and-control instrumentation and to the police post. At the police post the light
indication of the call object should be provided.
5.22.5. The ASA and Automatic Fire Alarm Installation (AFAI) systems can be integrated
in the common complex of the receiving-and-control instrumentation.
5.23. Administrative-and-production buildings
5.23.1. The spatial-and-planning solutions and technological equipment of the
administrative buildings should be defined by the design assignment.
5.23.2. The following items should be located in the dispatcher control building:
- line dispatcher points equipped with automated working places, line and communication
settings telecontrol systems according to the clauses 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.16, and 5.22.
- computing center;
- laboratory-and-repair subdivisions of the Line Dispatcher Point (LDP) and computing
center (CC) equipped with corresponding instrumentation and devices;
- rest, mess, and psychological relief rooms for dispatch personnel;
- administrative and sanitary-domestic premises;
- service and passenger elevators, cable shafts, and floor-by-floor cable ducts;
- step-down substation.
The dispatcher point (DP) premises should have the natural lighting and protection from
noise and vibration according to the clause 5.17 of the SNiP 32-02.
5.23.3. The operating personnel building of the line should accommodate:
- managers of operating subdivision services;
- sites and teams of construction structures, track facilities, and engineering equipment
maintenance services;
- shops for minor repair of the equipment, storage rooms;
- service and technical premises of the firefighting subdivisions and security;
- medical center, radiation therapy room, mess and psychological relief rooms;
- administrative and sanitary-domestic premises.
5.23.4. The administrative, sanitary-domestic, and auxiliary premises of the buildings
should be accepted in correspondence with staff schedule of the subdivisions.
It is allowed to integrate the premises for compatible profession groups.
5.24. Organization of construction
5.24.1. The initial data for development of the construction organization project includes
the information regarding the climatic conditions of the region, engineering researches,
character of the urban development, approved spatial-and-planning and constructive-andPage 117 of 295

technological solutions, underground objects and communications located in the construction
area, demand in the energy resources, conditions of their connection to the municipal
communications, and directive period of construction.
5.24.2. The composition of the construction organization project includes the following
graphical and textual materials:
- general scheme of the line and separate structures in the general layout of the terrain with
indication of sections constructed by the cut-and-cover and closed method, construction sites,
places of temporary disposal of ground;
- layouts of the construction sites with allocation of temporary buildings, structures, roads,
and, communications in them. The schemes of disposition of peripheral equipment at the
construction site for execution of special methods of works;
- geodesic-and-surveying and engineering-and-geological provision of the construction;
- methods of execution of the construction-and-mounting works by the sections, list of
main machines and equipment for execution of preparation and main works, including the
special works. The scopes of the executed works;
- structures of temporary shoring of trenches. Structure of shoring of the underground
openings, allowable gap between the working face and temporary shoring and permanent
linings. Organization of works on the construction of man structures and execution of works
on the water-proofing of structures;
- schemes of haulage rail tracks for the cut-and-cover and closed method of works,
definition of type of locomotive and cars, and train formation on the base of calculation of
haulage. Schemes of haulage by the rubber-tyred transport. Schemes of the pipeline
transportation of the bentonite suspension and slurry by openings. Organization of the vertical
transportation of people, ground, materials, and goods;
- schemes of the openings aeration at the all stages of construction by the closed and cutand-cover method of works after the mounting of the tunnel lining structures;
- scheme of the dewatering with indication of the water collectors’ capacity, diameter and
number of the water pipelines, stand pipes, pumps capacity, type of the water treatment plants
and their location on the surface with indication of places of the treated waters discharge;
- technical solutions on the construction sites power, water, and air supply, communication,
sewerage, and providing of the electrical safety;
- technical solutions on the providing of the above-ground and underground structures and
communications safety with indication of hazardous areas. Elaboration of the observation
stations project;
- layout of the research, hydro-observation and dewatering wells located in the tunnel
cross-section, or in close proximity to it, their depth. Instructions regarding the order of their
liquidation;
- order and methods of execution of works at the connection of newly constructed objects
to the operating line of the Underground Railroad;
- construction schedule;
- solutions on providing of the industrial safety and fire safety during the execution of
works;
- explanatory note.
5.24.3. The explanatory note should contain:
- substantiation of the construction technologies, special methods and speed of tunneling,
accepted at the given engineering-and-geological and urban development conditions in the
region of the line route;
- solutions on the creation of necessary temperature-and-humidity regime for the each
period of construction;
- methods and results of the following calculations:
а) temporary shoring structures;
Page 118 of 295

b) size and borders of the possible settlement of the surface;
c) traction calculations of the underground rail transport;
d) hydro-weight pressure value at the tunneling mining complexes by the all tunneling
route;
e) capacities of the main ventilation installations;
f) amount of the ground waters inflow to the openings;
g) required power of the electric energy and compressed air;
h) parameters of the special methods of works;
i) effect of the noise and vibration from the operating machines, mechanisms, and
equipment at the construction site, as well as from the explosion works in the underground
openings on the surrounding buildings.
5.24.4. To provide the sanitary-and-hygienic conditions of the construction the following
measures should be taken:
- diminution of the environmental pollutions and protection of the urban environment from
the noise and vibration;
- reduction of ionizing and non-ionizing radiation;
- creation of the normal micro-climate and lighting at the working places;
- reduction of the hardness of the workers’ labor and production injuries.
5.24.5. Where appropriate, the construction of the underground structures in the conditions
of considerable water inflows or high hydrostatic pressure, as well as in unstable grounds the
special methods of works, special equipment or technology should be provided according to
the SNiP 3.02.01, VSN (branch construction norms) 127, VSN 189, and clause 6.7.
5.24.6. Development of the underground structures COP at the closed method of works
5.24.6.1. Depending on the engineering-and-geological conditions and urban development
situation the mining complexes, safety guards with shearing sites, as well as ground
development using the continuous heading machine or by the drill and blast method with or
without arrangement of the temporary shoring should be used.
The ground development by the drill and blast method should be provided in
correspondence with the PB (safety regulations) 13-407.
For the short sections the tunneling by the squeezing down method or with arrangement of
advance protective blanket can be applied.
As a rule, the tunneling should be organized uphill.
5.24.6.2. At the organization of tunneling under the water barriers, at the places of possible
water or ground masses breakthrough the lintel blocks with hermetic doors designed on the
maximum possible hydrostatic pressure with reliability factor of 1,5 should be provided.
5.24.6.3. The mounting and demounting of the pre-fabricated lining elements using the
stackers should be provided.
Application of wrenches with this purpose is allowed at the limited length sections of the
opening where utilization of the stackers is impossible or ineffective.
It is recommended to provide the mounting of the pre-fabricated linings of the tunnels
using the safety guards in the stable grounds, at the level of the ground waters below the
bottom of the opening by the lining pre-stressing method.
The method of pre-stressing and its force should be defined in the works execution project
depending on the engineering-and-geological conditions.
5.24.6.4. Development of the short openings with big cross-section in the unstable grounds
should be provided with preliminary shoring of grounds or using the advance protective
blanket.
The methods of construction of the big cross-section openings should provide saving of the
surrounding rock mass in unripped conditions, and mechanized execution of works.
5.24.6.5 To fill the gaps under the lining the characteristics of the cement slurries, as well
as time and place of injection should be defined.
Page 119 of 295

5.24.6.6. At the application of lining made from the pre-fabricated reinforced concrete
elements at the single-vault station its construction can be executed using the crown prestressing by flat hydraulic jacks.
The technology of pre-stressing and its force should be defined in the works execution
project.
5.24.6.7. The content of the harmful gases and dust in the air of the underground openings
should not exceed the value indicated in the PB 03-428. The maximum allowable
concentration of the harmful substances in the air exhaust to the atmosphere should
correspond to the ГН (Hygienic standards) 2.1.6.1338.
5.24.7. Development of the underground structures COP at the cut-and-cover method of
works
5.24.7.1. At the construction of structures in the open pits the following should be
provided:
- fencing of the pits, planning of territories and removal of the surface waters, as well as,
where appropriate, arrangement of dewatering;
- preparation of the sites for crane runways;
- order of the mechanized development of the ground in the pit and order of the shoring
installation;
- places of continuous and temporary storage of the developed ground.
5.24.7.2. In the case of necessity of the water-proofing linings arrangement and
unavailability of dewatering systems in the pit hollows, the latter ones should have the width
no less than 1,2 m, in case of availability of such systems - 1,5 m.
In the pits with slopes at the unavailability of the drainage facilities in the channel the
distance between the structure wall and the slope bedding should be no less than 0,5 m.
5.24.7.3. The pit walls shoring using the cantilever poles, dowels, ground anchorages, or
buntons should be provided depending on the hydro-geological conditions, urban
development situation, pit dimensions, terrain profile, and accepted technology of
construction.
5.24.7.4. In the difficult engineering-and-geological or urban development conditions it is
advisably to provide the pit shoring by the method «wall in the ground» from the cast-in-situ
or prefabricated reinforced concrete. Development of the ground in this case can be executed
by the semi-closed method.
5.24.8. Construction sites should be equipped with the complex of production and
administrative-and-domestic premises, should have the roads and storage sites with hard
covering, treatment facilities and washing area for the motor car wheels with recirculation
water supply, sufficient lighting of the working places and traffic ways.
The sanitary-protective areas of the construction sites should be accepted on the base of
specific conditions of the route taking into consideration the SanPiN 2.2.1/2.1.1.1200.
5.24.9. In case of the route driving at the sections polluted with harmful substances
exceeding the allowable levels settled for the harmful factors effect, as well as in case of
location of construction sites within the sanitary-protective areas of the operating enterprises a
number of protective measures should be developed.
5.24.10. The spatial-and-planning solutions on the temporary premises at the construction
sites should correspond to the SNiP 2.09.04 taking into consideration accommodation of
maximal number of the given object workers.
The sanitary-domestic premises and medical center should be located, as a rule, in close
proximity to the entrance to the underground opening, or to the working sector.
5.24.11. At the construction sites treatment of the industrial and storm waste waters should
be provided. The treatment degree for the waters discharged to the municipal networks or
water reservoirs should correspond to the SaNPiN № 4630 and GOST 17.1.5.02.
5.24.12. The construction general layouts of the base construction sites should be
Page 120 of 295

coordinated with the interested organizations in the established by the Russian Federation
legislation and by the local administration authorities order.
5.24.13. At the development of the project of conservation or liquidation of the object it is
necessary to follow the RD (directive documents) 07-225.
5.25. Industrial safety
5.25.1. At the designing of the Underground Railroad line in the difficult engineering-andgeological conditions with application of different special methods of works the «Industrial
safety» section should be included in the composition of the Feasibility Study (project). At the
designing of the line sections in the relatively favorable engineering-and-geological
conditions with application of the cut-and-cover method of works or assimilated technologies
it is allowed to reflect the industrial safety requirements in the COP section.
5.25.2. In the composition of the «Industrial safety» section the possible factors resulting to
the problems and accidents at the construction, as well as technical solutions directed to the
provision of safety of the city inhabitants, workers of the construction-and-mounting
organizations, and environmental protection should be considered. Herewith it is
recommended to reflect:
- measures on the provision of safety of buildings, structures, and underground
communications located in the area of probable settlement of the surface;
- process flow-sheet of the construction of underground openings with indication of used
machines, mechanisms, equipment, and their main technical specifications, especially at the
sections with application of special methods of works and drill and blast works;
- arrangement of the temporary shoring of the underground openings and organization of
works on the construction of the permanent linings;
- organization of the vertical transportation of grounds, materials, and goods;
- technical solutions on the protection of the environment from the harmful effect of
construction-and-mounting works (noise and vibration, emissions of the harmful substances to
the air, pollution of the ground waters, decrease or increase of the ground waters level, etc);
- measures on provision of the fire and electrical safety in the process of execution of
construction-and-mounting works;
- technical solutions on the uninterruptable power and compressed air supply,
communication, on the underground openings aeration regime taking into consideration
development of the mining works; recommendations on the heating or cooling of the air
supplied to the openings should be given;
- measures on the localizing and liquidation of probable emergency situations during
construction, on the protection from possible emergency situations at the dangerous industrial
objects located in the construction area;
- solutions on creation of the technical conditions for connection to the operating networks.
5.25.3. At the development of the project documentation by multiple organizations the
general designer should establish the spheres of responsibility of the each organization in the
«Industrial safety» section. In case of changes in the project solutions during the construction
the expertise of the industrial safety of these changes and their coordination with the Russian
State Municipal Technical Supervision Authorities should be conducted.
5.25.4. Application of the imported mining technique, hoisting and transportation
equipment in the project documentation is allowed after the inspection of their conformance
to the requirements of Russian Standards and safety regulations.
5.26. Technical and protected zones
5.26.1. Area of the technical zones for the provision of the Underground Railroad objects
construction should be accepted according to the clause 3.5 of the SNiP 32-02.
5.26.2. The technical zones for the provision of the Underground Railroad objects
operation should be provided:
- near the above-ground station vestibules;
Page 121 of 295

- near the ventilation cabinets and demounting shaft chambers;
- outside the fencing of the above-ground sections of the Underground Railroad lines,
connecting track branches, electric depot, and other structures.
5.26.3. Boundaries of the technical zones with the purpose of observance of normal
conditions for the passenger flows and provision of the maintenance and repair works should
be defined on the base of real situation at the adjacent sections of the urban territory.
5.26.4. Boundary of the technical zone of the free standing above-ground station vestibule
should be located at the distance no less than 5 m from the structure outline with increase at
the places of the passenger flows and at the sections used for provision of the repair works.
At the location of the vestibule in the other designation building the boundary of the
technical zone should be defined only for the part of building used by the Underground
Railroad.
5.26.5. Near the entrance (exit) to the vestibule or to the under-street crossing the boundary
of the technical zone should be accepted at the distance of 15 m from them, but within the
boundary of beginning of the traffic way.
5.26.6. At the places of arrangement of sites for allocation of the escalator elements and
other operation equipment near the station vestibules, demounting shafts, over the water
pipeline, heating, and cable inputs, etc, the boundaries of the technical zone should be
assigned in correspondence with the repair works technology.
The width of the passage to the place of repair works should be no less than 4 m.
5.26.7. Boundaries of the technical zone for the free standing production designation
buildings should be accepted at the distance of 7 m from the building outline in the plan.
5.26.8. Boundaries of the technical zone around the ventilation cabinets should be accepted
at the distance of 25 m from their outline.
5.26.9. The width of the technical zone outside the fencing of the above-ground line
sections and other above-ground structures for arrangement of passages should be no less than
4 m.
5.26.10. The protected zones should be provided over:
- underground stations regardless from the depth of their bedding, and under-street
crossings;
- ventilation and demounting shafts, well heads and sumps of the water drainage and
sewerage installations;
- sections of adjacency of the water pipeline, heating, and cable inputs to the Underground
Railroad facilities.
The protected zone boundaries should be defined taking into consideration the urban
development and transport situation.
5.26.11. The distance between the structure outline in the plan and protected zone
boundary should be equal to, m, for:
а) station constructed by the closed method - 5;
b) station constructed by the cut-and-cover method - 10;
c) other shallow structures at the distance from the ground surface up to 8 m including - 10.
5.26.12. The executive documentation on the Underground Railroad objects with inserted
boundaries of technical and protected zones should be submitted to the customer at their
commissioning, as well as to the municipal organization – developer and holder of the
topographic plans.
6. CONSTRUCTION
6.1. General provisions
6.1.1. The construction-and-mounting works, including the preparation works, should start
after obtaining of permission from the customer for their execution only.
The ground works, uncovering and re-laying of the underground communications should
be executed on the base of permission issued by the authorized institutions of the municipal
Page 122 of 295

executive power.
6.1.2. Construction of the objects should be executed in the technological consequence
established by the calendar schedule of works.
6.1.3. At the each object the manufacturing inspection of the industrial safety requirements
observance according to the RD 04-355 should be organized, as well as the documentation
according to the SNiP 3.01.01 and to the present Summary of Regulations should be kept.
6.1.4. The general contractor - construction organization should conduct the observation of
the conditions of buildings, structures, and communications located in the area of possible
settlement of the surface.
6.1.5. After the completion of the object construction the general contractor should submit
to the customer the technical documentation according to the Appendix 7А.
6.2. Organizational-technological preparation
6.2.1. During the period of preparation to the begining of the construction-and-mounting
and special works the design and estimate documentation and regulatory documents related to
the planning kind of works should be studied, the works execution projects, and, where
appropriate, the job descriptions for workers on the each kind of works should be developed.
6.2.2. The works execution project (WEP) should be elaborated by the construction
organization or, by its assignment, project (project-and-technological) organization on the
base of COP and other design and estimate documentation.
Deviations from the approved project solutions in this case are not allowed without
coordination with the customer.
6.2.3. The WEP composition includes:
- calendar schedule of works, periods of the works execution, and consequence of
operations;
- general construction layout in the dynamics of execution of works by the stages or work
zones with indication of:
а) location of the temporary buildings, structures, and engineering networks;
b) temporary roads, connecting tracks, transport vehicles movement schemes;
c) disposition of mechanisms and equipment;
d) dangerous zones and places of execution of heightened danger works, passage ways to
the underground openings, to the buildings and structures;
e) location of signs of the geodesic marking-out;
f) places of temporary ground disposal, facilities for collection of wastes, location of the
treatment facilities;
- technological cards, schedules of the works execution;
- Information regarding the demand in materials, facilities, equipment, workers’ protective
means, component lists, schedules and organization of delivery of goods and materials;
- schedules of the working personnel movement by the objects;
- mining technique construction machines and mechanisms traffic schedules;
- schemes of the quality control by operations;
- certificates of the drill and blast works and temporary shoring of openings;
- rail structures, track switches and their fastenings, trolley wires suspension, organization
of the locomotive accumulators’ charging;
- organization of passages for workers on the shafts, inclined tunnels, and horizontal
openings, organization of the mechanisms and pneumatic transport vehicles traffic in the
underground openings;
- solutions on ventilation of the underground openings: local aeration schemes, ventilation
pipes fastening structures, ventilation partitions, organization of the air quality measurements;
- solutions on the water drainage: water receivers and equipment of the water drainage
plants;
- underground openings and construction sites lighting networks diagram, organization of
Page 123 of 295

the emergency lighting, measures on the electrical safety;
- compressed air networks;
- firefighting facilities, emergency stock of materials, inventory, equipment, number and
place of their location.
6.2.4. The works execution projects should correspond to the SNiP 3.01.01, SNiP 12-03,
SNiP 12-04, and PB 03-428.
6.2.5. In case of change of the project solutions, conditions of execution of works,
emerging of the dangerous external factors, etc, the WEP should be corrected or newly
developed.
6.3. Geodesic-surveying provision
6.3.1. Planned-high-altitude network on the surface
6.3.1.1. The geodesic ranging net should be created before the main construction works
start.
6.3.1.2. The geodesic horizontal control networks should provide the required accuracy of
the counter headway cross-passages and stacking of the structure axis.
The standard error т of the mutual definition of the horizontal control network points from
which the tunnel cross-passage is executed should not exceed the following allowances:
For the tunnels constructed through the portals:
without the subsequent extension of control

m = ±0,6∆

L
;
l

with the subsequent extension of control

m = ±0,4∆

L
;
l

For the tunnels constructed through the shafts:
without the subsequent extension of control

m = ±0,45∆

L
;
l

with the subsequent extension of control

L
;
l
where ∆ is the value of allowable displacement of the working axis of tunnel from the final
axis defined after the counter tunnels cross-passage, mm;
L is the length of the constructed tunnel, km;
l is the average distance between the adjacent shafts, portals, and adits, km.
6.3.1.3. To create the geodesic horizontal control network (tunnel triangulation,
polygonometry instead of triangulation, basic polygonometry, analytical networks instead of
basic triangulation) it is recommended to apply the technology of survey using the satellite
navigation system (SNS).
At the creation of the SNS geodesic survey network the mutual visibility between the
horizontal control network points is not required.
m = ±0,3∆

N o t e – The SNS network is built instead of triangulation networks, trilateration, polygonometry by the way
of geodesic quadrangles, central systems, and other shapes.

The SNS survey network is created for the established period of construction with
obligatory annual repeated surveys.
The accuracy of definition of mutual point positions in case of the survey using the SNS
geodesic receivers should range from 5 + 1 × 10-6L to 10 + 2 × 10-6L, mm, where L is the
distance between the points, km.
The standard error of the direction angles, obtained by the SNS survey should not exceed
5,0".
Page 124 of 295

In case of conduction of measurements using the single-frequency satellite SNS receivers
the length of the sides should not exceed 10 km.
Before the SNS survey works start at the each network point the spatial cut-off angle no
less than 15° should be settled. In case of obstacles (spatial cut-off) availability the celestial
sphere cutoff should be modeled by the compiled outlines to receive the prognosis on the date
of survey by which the most favorable period of execution of works should be defined.
The SNS survey should be conducted in the static mode according to the technical
certificate on the SNS satellite receiver with observance of all allowances, with no less than
two surveys per each point.
The set of receivers should pass the metrological attestation on the standard horizontal
control networks.
The office treatment should be executed on the PC using the software for the given set of
SNS satellite receivers.
In case the application of SNS in the conditions of densely multi-floor built-up is difficult,
it is recommended to create the geodesic horizontal control networks by the polygonometrical
methods instead of triangulation using the electronic tachometers, with observance of the
technology and allowances according to the VSN 160.
6.3.1.4. The horizontal extension control networks should be created using the SNS survey
with the purpose of obtaining of near-portal (near-shaft) horizontal points in the shafts, tunnel
portals, and other areas with the required for the construction accuracy and dense.
The network can be built in the form of the geometrical shapes convenient for approach to
the shaft, portal, etc. Definition of the network points should be executed twice from the
different points of the horizontal control network. The mutual visibility between the points of
the horizontal extension control network should be provided.
In case the application of SNS is impossible it is recommended to execute the approach by
the approach polygonometrical method using the electronic tachometers on the base of SNS
positions.
The accuracy of definition of the horizontal extension control network points’ mutual
positions (approach polygonometry) should be 5 - 10 mm. The standard error of the direction
angle should not exceed 10".
6.3.1.5. The vertical control should be applied for stacking of the design reference point of
the structure by the height, and should be divided to the geodesic control networks and
extension control networks.
6.3.1.6. The vertical control network should be created by the II class geometrical height
measurement method with obligatory correlation with the state I and II class height network.
The II class leveling should be executed using the most advanced instrumentation and
survey methods, and possibly full excluding of the systematic errors.
The errors of survey in the geodetic chains and II class level lines no more than ± 5 mm
L are allowed, where L is the geodetic chain perimeter or the level line length in km.
For the II class leveling the geodetic levels and collimating staffs passed the metrological
attestation should be applied.
The control researches of the collimating staffs should be executed using the control scale
having the equation providing the definition of its length with the accuracy of ± 0,01 mm. The
control scale should be annually calibrated on the comparator.
The II class leveling should be conducted with observance of the stipulated allowances.
The base leveling network should be created with the following allowances, no more than:
- length of the running between initial control survey points - 2 km;
- length of the running between junction control survey points - 1 km;
- distance between the control survey point, m:
а) for the difficult construction units - 100;
b) for the built-up regions - 200;
Page 125 of 295

c) for the low built-up regions - 300.
6.3.1.7. The vertical extension control network should be created with the purpose of
provision of the height marks with required dense for the construction area, and should
executed by the III or IV class leveling method. The leveling should be conducted by the
closed-loop geodetic chains or extended running with their correlation with the high class
control survey points, supporting the allowances stipulated by the Instructions [7].
6.3.2. Orientation of the underground planned-high-altitude network
6.3.2.1. For orientation of the underground planned-high-altitude network the direction
angles, coordinates, and height marks are transmitted from the surface ground to the
underground openings.
6.3.2.2. Transmission of the direction angles should be conducted by gyroscopic devices gyro theodolites. The gyro theodolites should be calibrated no less than every three months.
Orientation of the underground polygonometric network includes:
- definition of the gyro theodolite correction on the side with known direction angle on the
ground surface;
- definition of the direction angle of oriented side of the underground polygonometric
network;
- repeated definition of the gyro theodolite correction on the side with known direction
angle.
Definition of the gyro theodolite correction should be conducted by one forward and
backward run toward the each of two gyro units on the two closest to the shaft sides of the
horizontal control. The length of the side on the surface for definition of the correction should
be no less than 100 m. Displacement between the correction values should be no more than
20" for each gyro unit.
Orientation of the underground polygonometric network side should be conducted by two
gyro units with installation of the gyro theodolite, as a rule, at the both ends of measuring
side. Displacement between the values of direction angle of the underground line defined by
several orientations should be no more than 20".
6.3.2.3. Transmission of coordinates to the underground opening should be executed
through the shafts, inclined openings and tunnel portals two or more times using the laser
devices of vertical sighting, geodimeters, or plummets.
Coordinates of the point located in the shaft, or its projection in the underground openings
should be defined from the horizontal extension control network point of the near-shaft (nearportal) SNS position (approach polygonometry). Obtained on the surface coordinates of the
projected point in the underground opening should be accepted as initial coordinates.
Transmission of the coordinates through the tunnel portals and inclined openings should be
executed by the method of the field traverse running.
At the multiple transmissions of coordinates to the tunnels the coordinate values of the
underground polygonometric network marks should be corrected for the every new
transmission, and direction angle values should be corrected for the each orientation.
The displacement between the coordinate values obtained by no less than two
transmissions should be no more than 15 mm.
6.3.2.4. The height marks obtained from two or more control survey points on the surface
to should be transmitted to underground openings to no less than two polygonometric marks
in the tunnel using the laser and metal tape rule, geodimeters, and plummets. The
displacement between the height marks obtained after no less than two transmissions should
be no more than 6 mm. Transmission of the height marks through the adits and escalator
tunnels should be executed by the geometrical height measurement method.
Displacements in the control survey point marks obtained from the different transmissions
through the adits and inclined openings should be no more than ± 2 mm
number of tripods.

n , where п is the

Page 126 of 295

6.3.3. Planned-high-altitude network in the underground openings
6.3.3.1. The planned-high-altitude network is created for plotting of the design axis of the
underground openings in plane and by the height with remoteness of the heading from the
underground polygonometric network orientation point.
6.3.3.2. Development of the underground network executed after the first orientation
should be fulfilled with high accuracy.
The major and primary traverses of the underground polygonometric network should be
run by the elongated triangles method with measurement of three their angles and two sides.
The underground network should meet two main requirements:
- the lateral shear of the network near the place of the tunnel cross-passage should not be
more than allowable value;
- the distance between the network points should provide the necessary accuracy of
location survey and survey works in the tunnel.
It is recommended to accept the following length of sides, m:
- primary traverse - 50 - 100;
- major traverse - 150 - 800.
The major traverses should be run by the points of the major underground control network;
selection of points included in the major traverse depends on the length of the single-way run
and on the geometrical shape of the route.
The primary traverses should be run in all cases of tunneling and adit driving regardless of
the distances between the adjacent shafts or portals, the major traverses – in the cases when
the primary traverses do not provide the required accuracy of the cross-passage only.
The underground polygonometric network should be run with the following allowances:
а) relative error of survey in the traverse perimeter should be no more than 1:20000 for the
primary traverses;
b) the standard error of the angle measuring should be no more than ± 3";
c) the accidental effect factor at the line measuring should be no more than ± 0,0003, the
systematic effect factor – no more than ± 0,00001;
d) the angle errors of survey in the triangles should be no more than ± 8".
The points of the underground polygonometric network should be fastened:
a) at the cut-and-cover method of construction – with metal button head rods, in the head
of which the hollow caulked with copper, bronze or brass should be drilled. The rods should
be imbedded in the concrete monument in the trough part of the tunnel, welded to the tunnel
lining reinforcement bars on the level of the concrete at the distance of 200 mm from the
structure linings;
b) At the closed method of construction – by the hollow caulked with copper, bronze or
brass at the site notched on the stiffening rib or on the edge of the cast iron liner of the tunnel
lining on the level of the track rail heads.
6.3.3.3. To observe the design slopes and tunnel profile position it is necessary to develop
the vertical underground network with the remoteness of the heading.
The underground geometrical leveling should be executed by the polygonometric network
marks.
The transmission of the marks of the control survey points to the heading up to the
cross=passage and final leveling after the cross-passage should be conducted forward and
backward by the III class leveling method with observance of the following allowances:
а) inequality of distances from the geodetic level to the collimating staffs at the station - 2
m, their accumulation by the section - 5 m;
b) displacement in the relative heights defined at the station by the black and red sides of
the collimating staff, - ± 3 mm;
c) displacement between the forward and backward traverses, as well as errors of survey in
geodetic chains - ± 2 mm

n , where п is the number of tripods in the geodetic chain;
Page 127 of 295

d) errors of survey of traverses run between the control survey points marks of which were
obtained from the transmissions through the shafts or ventilation wells - ± 49L′ + 49L + 32
mm, where L′ is the length of leveling line in the underground openings, km; L is the length of
the leveling line on the surface, km;
e) for the underground leveling lines directly connected with the surface (through the
portals and adits), - ± 49 L′ + 49 L mm.
The office treatment of the planned-high-altitude underground network should be executed
on the PC: before the cross-passage the unclosed traverses of the polygonometric network
should be processed, after the cross-passage adjustment of the network should be conducted
taking into consideration the observance of optimal dimensions of the structure; adjustment of
the leveling lines up to the cross-passage should be conducted as the unclosed traverses, after
the cross-passage - taking into consideration the project documentation on the permanent
track laying and actual deviation of the tunnel from the design position.
All points of the planned-high-altitude underground network should be numbered. The
points located in the 1st track tunnel should have the odd numbers, and the ones located in the
2nd track tunnel should have the even numbers.
6.3.4. Geodesic and surveying provision of the construction and mounting works
6.3.4.1. Geodesic and surveying provision of the construction and mounting works (CMW)
should be executed with the purpose of stacking of the project correlations of the construction
complex, strict observance of the stipulated dimensions, accurate tunneling mechanisms drive
on the design route, accurate connection of the tunnel cross-passages, other underground
structures and structural elements.
6.3.4.2. The working planned-high-altitude network in the underground openings should be
created with remoteness of the heading to the distance of 150 m for definition of positions of
the tunneling mechanisms providing the erection of linings.
The working underground polygonometric network should be run twice with the sides of
25 - 50 m. The length of lines should be measured forward and backward, measuring results
accuracy should be ± 3 mm. The length of lines measurement accuracy should be 1:10000.
The angles should be measured in three sets with the following allowances:
а) discrepancy of readings in backward direction at the closing - 10";
b) fluctuation of directions set to zero - 15".
The working network should be run in the form of the chain of triangles twice and at
different times by independent supervisors. The error of survey in the triangle should be no
more than ± 10"; discrepancy between the angle measuring results should be no more than
10", for the lines - 1:10000.
The processing of the network should be conducted as by short, as by long sides of
triangles.
In case the length of the network sides is less than 25 m the special methods of survey
should be developed.
The vertical network should be built using the polygonometric network points by the IV
class leveling method with the following allowances:
а) displacement of distances from the geodetic level to the collimating staff at the station
should be no more than 5 m, their accumulation by the section – up to 10 m;
b) the error of survey obtained by the leveling line between the initial points should be no
more than ± 20 mm L , where L is the length of traverse, km.
6.3.4.3. At the construction of structures by the cut-and-cover method the location survey
by the stacking of the structure axis and design reference points should be executed for the
following works:
- pit shoring;
- ground development;
Page 128 of 295

- preparation of concrete;
- mounting of structures from the pre-fabricated and cast-in-situ reinforced concrete.
On the base of design data, coordinates, and height marks of the planned-high-altitude
network points the pre-calculation of the ranging elements should be executed: line lengths,
horizontal angles, normals, displacements, and design relative altitudes.
The location survey in plane can be executed by polar method, or by angular or linear
resection method.
The height marks should be put aside the device horizon at the calculation of readings by
collimating staff from the design mark.
The location survey should be conducted with the following allowances, mm:
а) transmission of the height mark to the pit bottom ................................... ± 10
b) «walls in ground» pit shoring and piled shoring ..................................... up to + 250
c) «walls in ground» and piled shoring at the level of the pit bottom ......... ± 150
d) pit in the slope ......................................................................................... ± 50
e) pit axis ...................................................................................................... ± 10.
At the arrangement of the concrete preparation its upper level should be fixed with
deviation from the design position in profile no more than ± 10 mm.
The design marks for the flooring lining should be plotted instrumentally with accuracy of
± 3 mm.
The ranging for the construction of formwork should be executed from the longitudinal
and cross axis with the allowance of 20mm toward the increase of dimensions.
6.3.4.4. For the stations constructed by the closed method of works the pre-calculation of
the ranging elements should be executed in the same manner as for the stations constructed by
the cut-and-cover method of works, with application of the same geodesic survey instruments.
At the construction of the stations with original structure the project documentation should
contain the necessary requirements to the structure geometry and allowances.
6.3.4.5. At the construction of the main line tunnels with pre-fabricated linings made from
the cast-iron liners, reinforced concrete and pre-fabricated reinforced concrete liners all
survey works on the lining rings laying should be bases on the data of the underground
polygonometric network and vertical network.
The pre-calculation of the ranging data for stacking of the main line tunnel elements should
be executed on the base of the project data, coordinates, and height marks of the underground
polygonometric network.
For the circular outline tunnels made from prefabricated reinforced concrete the allowances
of the rings displacement should be the same with the ones accepted for the cast-iron linings.
6.3.4.6. For the provision of the construction of near-tunnel structures it is recommended to
apply the technology of execution of survey works and allowances accepted for the main line
tunnels constructed by the closed method of works.
6.3.4.7 At the construction of the shield-driven tunnels the survey works should include:
- fastening of the design axis of the tunnel, normal to this axis, and marks necessary for
construction of foundation under the shield and its mounting within the mounting chamber;
- definition of the correctness of the geometrical shape of the foundation under the shield;
- definition of the correctness of the geometrical shapes of the mounted shield: correlation
of the shield axis with the tunnel axis in plane, correspondence of its position in profile to the
design position, absence of the cross slope (roll), correctness of the longitudinal slope,
absence of the shield ellipticity;
- fastening of the survey marks and devices on the shield;
- fastening of the reference signals on the back of the shield for advancing by the design
axis in plane and profile;
- advancing of the shield during the process of the route driving;
- definition of the shield position in plane and profile after the each advance;
Page 129 of 295

- definition of the lining rings’ position after the laying completion.
For the execution of mounting works on assembling of the shield in the chamber the
following surveying data should be defined:
- design longitudinal axis of the shield (tunnel), fastened in the chamber arch at three or
more points;
- normal to the longitudinal axis of the shield (tunnel);
- reference level mark correlated with the design center of the shield.
Herewith it should be considered than the design mark of the shield center is more than the
design mark of the tunnel center by the value of half-difference between the diameters of the
internal surface of the shield cover and external circumference of the ring.
The first three shield segments should be installed with the participation of the mining
surveyor with accuracy in plane and by the height no more than ± 10 mm without twisting.
After completion of the shield mounting the longitudinal and radial surveying should be
conducted by the results of which the following should be defined:
- the length of the cutting edge of the shield;
- the length of the body of the shield (or the length of the bottom part of the body if it
integrates the both rings en bloc);
- the length of the shield cover (from the body to the tail of the shield);
- four diameters for the each of the following: cutting edge, backplane of the body of the
shield and tail of the shield cover.
Displacement of the shield center from the design direction of the route in plane and profile
should not exceed ± 50 mm. Taking into consideration the process of the vertical settlement
of the tunnel lining rings at the exit from the cover it is recommended to advance the shield in
profile 2 - 3 cm above the project mark. This dimension can change on the base of experience
of the tunneling in the given geological conditions.
For definition of the shield position in plane the distances between the cutting and tail arcs,
cutting arc and cutter, tail arc and tail as well as the distances from the axis marks to the cover
bottom and to the real longitudinal axis of the shield should be measured.
At the definition of positions of the cutting and tail arcs relating to the design axis the
cutter and tail positions relating to the design route marks should be calculated using the ratio
of distances between the arcs and cutting and tail arcs.
To define the shield position in plane and profile the laser direction positioner, optical
panel meter, geodetic level, or automatic shield advance device should be used. To define the
shield roll the level gauge, plummet, and gradienter should be used.
The data of the shield twisting value should be used for calculation of the correction of the
cutter and tail positions.
6.3.4.8. Before the start of the construction of escalator tunnels and above-ground
vestibules the plane and vertical geodetic base should be created on the ground surface
providing the escalator tunnel cross-passage with the middle station tunnel or other
underground structures. The accuracy of the geodetic base should correspond to the clause
6.3.1.
6.3.4.9 For the surveying provision of the escalator tunneling the surveying table meeting
the following requirements should be installed by its axis:
- The table structure should be hard, isolated from the supervisor site and surrounding
mechanisms;
- The sighting axis of theodolite or laser direction positioner installed on the table should
be correlated with the design axis of the tunnel;
- The visibility of three remote to no less than 50 m points one of which stipulates the
tunnel axis direction, and the other two are the reference points, should be provided from the
table. The continuous visibility by the design tunnel axis should also be provided;
- The center of the table (projection of the sighting and horizontal pipe axis crossing point)
Page 130 of 295

and places of the theodolite foot screws installation should be punched at the table plate.
The table should be equipped with the telephone communication and light alarm for
transmission of indications to the heading.
6.3.4.10. At the bedding of the first ring of escalator tunnel the rings run-on (tunnel
extension) at the rate of 1 mm per ring should be considered if it is not taken into account in
the project documentation.
At the laying of the first ring segments inspection of its installation should be conducted by
means of measurement of eight radiuses from the design center of the ring, and generants –
from the point fixed on the tunnel axis. The measurements should be conducted to the centers
of bolt holes of the front plane of the ring.
6.3.4.11. At the concreting of the foundations under the escalators the stacking of marks
for installation of the cross elements of structures should be conducted with 10mm lowering
relating to the design inclined base of the escalators.
The foundations under escalators should be constructed with the accuracy: in plane - ± 20
mm, in profile - from 0 to -20 mm. The level of the inclined base should be fastened on the
both sides of the tunnel with the accuracy of ± 20".
Before the start of the escalators mounting works the reference measurements of the
distance between their upper and lower vertical bases on the both sides of the escalator tunnel
should be executed.
It is recommended to execute the high-altitude correlation of the upper and lower vertical
bases as well.
The stacking of marks for installation of longitudinal elements of the escalator structures
should be executed with 10mm lowering relating to the design inclined base with the accuracy
of ± 5 mm. The plotting of the axis of the longitudinal elements of the escalator structures in
plane should be executed with the accuracy of ± 5 mm.
The stacking for installation of the rims of upper guiding stairs of escalators should be
executed in plane symmetrically regarding to the escalator axis with the accuracy of ± 1 mm.
Deviation from the perpendicularity of the stacked cross and longitudinal axis in the ends
of escalators should be no more than ± 30", for the mounting wires in the middle section – no
more than ± 10".
The allowable deviation of guides of the inclined girders of escalators in plane and by the
height should be no more than 2 mm.
Deviations at the ranging of places for installation of anchor bolts in the foundations of
drive and tension zones of escalators in plane and by the height should be no more than ± 10
mm.
6.3.4.12. To provide the driving of the vertical shafts the shaft center ranging should be
executed by the stacking from the terrain situation in plane at the scale of 1:500, or by the
coordinated according to the project documentation.
The method of fastening of the drop shaft axes on the terrain should provide the possibility
for checking of their positions at the any moment of the drop-shaft sinking. The control
survey points for the control of the vertical marks should be installed outside the possible
settlements and earth moving.
The coordinates of the stacked shaft center should be defined from two or more points of
the polygonometric network by the polar method. The real coordinates should be submitted to
the project organization for correction of the project documentation, where appropriate.
The shaft axes ranging should be executed with the accuracy of ± 10 mm.
At the foreshaft construction the lagging jacks should be installed with the accuracy of ±
30 mm from the fixed axis and shaft center.
The surveying of the shaft cross-sections should be conducted in every 5 m.
6.3.4.13. After the shaft driving to the design mark the mark transmission from the surface
should be executed. The discrepancy between the mark values obtained from the transmission
Page 131 of 295

at the different levels or different positions of the tape should be no more than ± 4 mm. The
discrepancy between the mark values obtained from the transmissions made in different times
should be no more than ± 7 mm.
6.3.4.14. Provision of installation of buntons and guides in the shaft should be executed
from the fixed axis using the plummets.
The maximal deviation of the any plane of the wooden timbers for the slides is equal to ± 5
mm, for vertical guides – no more than ± 10 mm.
6.3.4.15. The height marks should be transmitted to the near-shaft openings and structures
from the near-shaft control survey point using the communicating vessels or geodetic level.
The near-shaft openings axis ranging should be executed from the geodetic base on the
surface with the accuracy of ± 5 mm. The longitudinal axis should be fixed in every 5 m in
plane and by the height with the accuracy of ± 5 mm.
6.3.4.16. The executive surveying of the structures should be conducted with their
construction. The surveying of the structure cross-sections should be executed at the straight
sections in every 10 m, at the curve sections – in every 5 m, as well as in the most specific
places necessary for compiling if the executive drawings. In addition to the cross-sections
photography the longitudinal leveling of the tunnel bottom and arch should be executed.
6.3.5. Laying of permanent track
6.3.5.1. The provision of works on the track laying should be executed after the conduction
of control injection in the tunnels constructed by the closed method of works and completion
of backfilling of the tunnels constructed by the cut-and-cover method of works to the design
marks, and fading of settlement of the tunnel.
Herewith the final measurements in the underground polygonometric network and leveling
network, and their final equation should be executed taking into consideration the optimal
adherence of dimensions to the GOST 23961.
6.3.5.2. On the base of the project data, coordinates, and height marks of the underground
planned-high-altitude network the geometrical parameters for the following should be
calculated:
- ranging and fixing of the horizon stipulating the upper level of the substructure;
- installation of the tunnel drainage gutters formwork;
- ranging and fixing of the main track points characterizing its plane and profile;
- ranging and fixing of the places of installation of the line control survey points,
photography of the installed control survey points by piquets and by height. Deviation of the
control survey points from the design picketage should not exceed ± 3 cm, real marks - ± 2
mm. After the completion of installation of the control survey points by height their control
leveling should be executed twice, whereupon the bolts of the control survey points should be
fastened by means of concreting;
- definition and calculation of the distances from the line control survey points to the
internal edge of the rail closest to the control survey point;
- track alignment before the concreting and supervision of the tracks during the
concreting process;
- detailed photography of the track;
- final leveling of the rail heads after the completion of the track «dressing» and running
testing, and definition of marks of the drainage gutter bottom.
6.3.5.3. The allowances after the final track alinement should correspond to the Appendix
6А.
6.3.6. Observations of settlement of the ground surface, deformation of buildings and
underground facilities
6.3.6.1. To reveal the possible settlements of buildings located in the mould of the ground
surface movement in the construction area, and their dynamics the survey stations should be
laid.
Page 132 of 295

6.3.6.2. At the survey stations the с leveling of the deformational probes should be
executed with periodicity stipulated by the revealed settlements.
The survey of the buildings settlement should be executed in the following consequence:
- elaboration of the observation station project with indication of the mould of the ground
surface movement equal by width to the two-fold depth of the tunnel bedding and located on
the both sides from the edges of the underground openings on the plan at the scale of 1:500;
- conduction of the reconnaissance at the terrain and marking of the places of settlement
and deformational probes. For the buildings the probes should be laid at the equal height from
the ground surface in every 15 - 20 m with obligatory installation on the corners and
individual jetties of the buildings;
- execution of the II class leveling by the settlement probes, and III class leveling by the
deformational probes, the errors of survey in the leveling networks should not exceed: for the
II class ± 5 mm L , for the III class ± 10 mm L , where L is the number of kilometers.
In case the traverse or geodetic chain contains more than 16 tripods per 1 km of the
traverse the error of survey should not exceed: for the II class ± 1,2 mm

n , for the III class

± 2,5 mm n , where п is the number of tripods in the traverse;
- compiling of the deformation probes mark sheet. The availability of settlements is fixed
in case the difference between the marks of the same probes obtained during the different
cycles exceeds ± 3 mm.
6.3.6.3. Observations of deformation of the underground facilities should be executed by
the observation stations.
In the circular outline underground facilities should be executed the following:
- laying of the angular traverses to obtain the plane position of the polygonometry points.
The angles should be measured three times. The discrepancy between the measurements
should be ± 8";
- forward and backward laying of the leveling lines by the polygonometry points. The error
of survey in the traverses and leveling networks should not exceed ± 2,5 mm n , where п is
the number of tripods;
- measurement of diameters of the each fifth ring (two inclined and one horizontal). The
error in the measurement of diameters should not exceed ± 10 mm;
- leveling of the arch of the each fifth ring. The error in the definition of the arch mark
should not exceed ± 5 mm;
- measurement of the distance from the range to the internal edge of the linings at the
horizontal diameter in every 5 m with the accuracy of ± 5 mm.
6.3.6.4. In the rectangular outline underground facilities should be executed the following:
- laying of the angular traverses to obtain the plane position of the polygonometry points.
The angles should be measured three times. The discrepancy between the measurements
should be ± 8";
- forward and backward laying of the leveling lines by the polygonometry points. The error
of survey in the traverses and leveling networks should not exceed ± 2,5 mm n , where п is
the number of tripods;
- leveling of the tunnel flooring in every 5 m;
- measurement of horizontal dimensions in every 5 m on the height of 1,2 m from the top
of foundation with the accuracy of ± 10 mm;
- definition of deviations of the wall lining blocks from vertical;
- measurement of the distance from the range to the nearest internal part of the lining in
every 5 m on the height of 1,2 m from the top of foundation with the accuracy of ± 5 mm.
On the base of the analysis of results of the angle change dynamics, arch marks and
polygonometry points, ring ellipticity and additional measurements the conclusion regarding
Page 133 of 295

the deformation of the underground facilities should be made.
6.3.6.5. It is recommended to execute all linear measurements at the survey of
deformations of the underground facilities using the manual laser distance gauge.
6.3.7. Executive surveying documentation
6.3.7.1. The executive surveying documentation should be elaborated for putting of
completed facilities to the permanent operation. In the executive drawings the structure of the
constructed facilities and details of complicated units of the structural connections should be
totally reflected. The list of executive drawings is represented in the Table 6.3.7.1.
T a b l e 6.3.7.1
List of drawings
Line route:
Executive plane and profile with geological cross-section
ground surface and underground facilities in plane
geodetic-and-surveying base
Catalogue of the line control survey points
Station:
а) platform part:
In plane
longitudinal profiles of the main line tunnels
longitudinal cross-section by the middle tunnel axis
service premises in plane
The same, cross-sections
longitudinal cross-section of the service premises
The same, cross-sections
б) vestibule:
Floor-by-floor planes
longitudinal cross-section
Cross-section
в) escalator tunnels:
In plane
longitudinal cross-sections
Cross-sections
Main line tunnels:
In plane
longitudinal cross-sections
cross-sections with the cross-sections sheet
longitudinal cross-sections of the service premises
The same, cross-sections
connection of wells to the municipal communications in plane
The same, longitudinal profiles
Shafts, near-shaft structures and openings:
vertical cross-sections of shaft
The same, cross-sections
near-shaft structures and openings in plane
The same, longitudinal cross-sections
» cross-sections
Open line section:
Station in plane
Run in plane
longitudinal profile of the run
The same, station
cross-sections of the run
The same, station
Electric depot and municipal underground communications:
Electric depot territories in plane
то же, longitudinal profile of the road bed
» cross-sections
longitudinal cross-sections of the municipal underground

Scale: (h) - horizontal, (v) - vertical
(h) - 1:5000, (v) - 1:500
1:500
-

1:200
(h) - 1:200, (v) - 1:100
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:50
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:200
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:200
1:50
1:200 or 1:500
(h) - 1:200 or 1:500, (v) - 1:100 or
1:200
1:50
1:100 or 1:200
1:50 or 1:100
1:500
(h) - 1:500, (v) - 1:100
1:200 or 1:100
1:50
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:200
1:50
1:200
1:500
(h) - 1:500, (v) - 1:200
1:100 or 1:200
1:100 or 1:50
1:100 or 1:50
1:500
(h) - 1:500, (v) - 1:100
1:100 or 1:200
(h) - 1:500, (v) - 1:100

Page 134 of 295

List of drawings

Scale: (h) - horizontal, (v) - vertical

communications

6.4. Engineering-and-geological provision
6.4.1. General provisions
6.4.1.1. The works on the engineering-and-geological provision should be executed in all
constructed openings by the program approved by the head of organization and agreed with
the customer.
The design-and-construction organizations conducted the engineering-and-geological
researches for the construction project, or other specialized organizations should be engaged
in this work.
6.4.1.2. The engineering-and-geological provision of the construction openings with
application of the tunneling complexes and tightening weight of heading (liquid, ground)
should be executed by the programs corresponding to the individual kind of complex.
5.4.1.3. In case of revelation of discrepancy between the real engineering-and-geological
conditions and ones reflected in the project documentation the customer, construction and
design organizations should be notified regarding this fact.
6.4.1.4. In case of necessity of correction of the engineering-and-geological conditions the
additional researches and investigations should be conducted.
The additional researches and investigations should be executed in case the following
unforeseen in the project problems occur during the tunneling:
- discrepancy between the physical-and-mechanical parameters of the grounds in heading
with the ones accepted in the project documentation;
- availability of gas showings, as well as pollution of the grounds with petroleum products;
- development of the strata pressure and deformational surface exceeding their design
values, as well as other negative processes (karst, settlement, water inflows, thixotropy
barrage, seismic).
6.4.1.5. In case of revelation of the hazardous engineering-and-geological conditions in the
heading the works should be stopped, manager of the mining works should be notified, and
records regarding that should be inserted in the field supervision log.
Further the degree of supposed hazard and risk should be evaluated with participation of
the customer, construction and design organizations representatives, and the engineering-andgeological provision group manager.
6.4.2. Scope of works at the construction of facilities by the closed method
6.4.2.1. The scope of engineering-and-geological works includes:
- systematic description of the grounds in the heading, arch and walls of opening;
- evaluation of the grounds strength and stability;
- check of correspondence of the engineering-and-geological conditions and calculated
indices of the physical-mechanical characteristics of grounds accepted in the проектной
documentation to the real data revealed during the execution of the construction works;
- evaluation of stability of the grounds in the heading, and its prognosis for the sites of
forthcoming mining works;
- investigation of the tectonic zones, fissuring, block size, carstified and other sites of
insecure rocks and their effect on the stability of grounds in the heading;
- definition of the ground categories by the mineability;
- definition of the water inflow to the opening.
6.4.2.2. The program of the engineering-and-geological provision of works should reflect
the periodicity of the heading inspections providing the necessary detailing of the
documentation by the openings depending on the changeability and complexity of the
engineering-and-geological conditions.
6.4.2.3. The results of heading surveys, sketches, and descriptions should be inserted in the
standard blanks on the base of which during the tunneling process the longitudinal geological
profile should be compiled.
Page 135 of 295

6.4.2.4. During the elaboration of the engineering-and-geological documentation the
fissuring degree in the heading should be evaluated by the Table 6.4.1 with definition of
stability of the heading crown and side walls of the opening; the facts of strata pressure,
availability of inrushes and over-brakes of ground should be fixed; specifics of the accepted
tunneling method, its effect on the conditions and stability of grounds, tunneling speed and
availability of processes negatively effecting on the bearing ability of the permanent tunnel
lining should be noted.
Stability of grounds in the opening can be evaluated approximately in correspondence with
the Table 6.4.2. It is recommended to compile the local classifications by the ground stability
applicably to the individual engineering-and-geological conditions taking into consideration
the methods of execution of works and heading areas accepted in the project.
6.4.2.5. The facts of the strata pressure in the arch, walls, and bottom of the opening should
be defined on the base of surveying data, inspection of linings and visible deformations of
bared rock surfaces. At the elaboration of documentation on the inrushes and collapses their
sketches should be made, their location, linear sizes in plane and profile, approximate volume,
time of keeping stability from the tunneling moment, availability of support, its deformation,
and supposed reasons of collapse or inrush should be indicated.
T a b l e 6.4.1
Fissuring degree
Non-fractured

Low fractured

Fractured

High fractured
Corrugated

Number of
fissures
No fissures

Characteristics

There are no visible fissures on the surface of heading and nearheading part of walls. The grounds are spited to the large blocks of
the 10 m3 volume
1-2
The average distance between the different systems’ fissures is equal
to 0,7 m, and more. The volume of ground blocks separated by
crossing fissures compiles 0,5 - 6,0 m3
3-5
The average distance between the different systems’ fissures is equal
to 0,2 - 0,7 m, and more. The volume of ground blocks separated by
crossing fissures compiles - 0,1 - 0,5 m3
6 - 30
The distance between fissureми is equal to 0,2 - 0,05 m. The volume
of the ground block - 0,001 - 0,1 m3
More than 30 The fissures form on the bared surface fine mesh. The grounds are
spited to the crushed rocks and landwaste

Notes
1. The number of fissures is defined on two perpendicular planes (for example, heading and wall) at the
length exceeding the average distance between fissures in 8 - 10 times. The fissures of all systems should be
considered regardless from their opening and filling with secondary formations.
2. The category of grounds by the difficulty of development should be defined in the whole for all mass of
the grounds developed in the heading. If there are two-three different groups ratio of their categories in per cents
from the heading area should be given.

T a b l e 6.4.2
Heading groungs stability
Grounds
degree
Stable
Rocky

Clay
Average stability

Rocky

Low stability

Clay
Rocky

Engineering-and-geological criteria
Massive, from very hard to low hard; fractured and low fractured,
fissures are closed or cemented with secondary materials without the
adjustment movement traces. Tectonic deformations are unavailable.
Drip is unavailable or low
Hard or half-hard homogeneous without the discontinuity. Water
inflow is unavailable
Massive or coarse-layer, from very hard to low hard; fractured, but
with favorable location of fissures. Tectonic deformations are poor.
Low drip is possible
Half-hard and low-plasticity, non-swelling
coarse-, fine-, and micro-layer any hardness; fractured and high
fractured with unfavorable location of fissures. The fissures are open
or with argillic filler. Considerable tectonic deformations. Drip. Water
inflows in the form of high drip and streams
Page 136 of 295

Heading groungs stability
degree

Grounds
Clay

Completely unstable

Sandy
Rocky
Clay
Sandy

Engineering-and-geological criteria
Low- and high-plasticity-. The flow-behavior index glows with the
time. Quickly soaking or swelling. Drip is possible
Non water-bearing
Very low hardness, high fractured or corrugated. Fissures are open.
Considerable tectonic deformations. Usually watered
Very soft and flow. Swelling
Water-bearing

Notes
1. The grounds stability means their ability to keep the balanced conditions in the heading (at the given
engineering-and-geological conditions, at the given method of the mining works and specific heading area)
without any obvious deformations during the time period necessary for installation of shoring.
2. In case the low stable or totally unstable grounds are bedded in the opening roof, the grounds within the
heading should be characterized correspondingly.
3. The ground stability degree can be defined depending on the specific conditions as by one criterion, as by
complex of criteria.

In the areas where according to the earlier executed researches (for the designing
substantiation) the engineering-and-geological conditions are characterized as complicated,
the heading inspection should be conducted especially carefully with the purpose of revelation
of hazard and risks due to man-triggered engineering-and-geological processes. Among the
latter ones the loss of heading grounds stability causing the subsequent deformations of the
grounds in massive and formation of the surface settlement moulds represent the biggest
hazard.
6.4.2.6. During the construction process the prognosis of engineering-and-geological
conditions of sites running ahead the heading should be executed.
The engineering-and-geological researches data for designing with additions and their
instantiation on the base of current information obtained during the elaboration of
documentation on the opening should be accepted as the basis of prognosis. It is advisably to
use the method of engineering-and-geological analogy for prognostication. The already
constructed sections of the given or other lines with doubtless geological analogy and with
similar structural and technological solutions can be accepted as the object-analogue.
6.4.2.7. During the hydro-geological surveying being the part of the engineering-andgeological works in the openings the value of the water inflow to the headings should be
defined, water temperature measurements and its sampling for the chemical analysis should
be conducted.
On the base of real water inflows and hydro-geological monitoring data the values of the
water inflows at the tunneled sections and at the sections of the forthcoming tunneling
represented in the project documentation should be corrected.
The characteristics of the water inflow in the openings are represented in the Table 6.4.3.
T a b l e 6.4.3
Water inflow to
the heading,
m3/h
Grounds are dry and wet Grounds in the heading are air-dry or wet. Water inflows are
No
unavailable
Drip is low
Water drops by the heading or from the roof. Formation of droplets
0,01 - 0,5
and their detachment can be easily traced by eyes. The number of
falling droplets is negligible, the sources of drip are the rocks’
porosity and separate fissures
Drip is high
Droplets fall frequently. Formation of droplets and their detachment
0,5 - 1,0
occur frequently and can be hardly traced by eyes. The source of drip
is the system of fissures
Drip in the form of The water inflows from the heading, roof, and walls in the form of
1,0 - 5,0
interruptible streams
very frequently droplets joining into streams. Heavy rain impression.
The sources of drip are the open fissures and cavities
Water inflow nature

Visual characteristics

Page 137 of 295

Water inflow to
the heading,
m3/h
Water inflow in the form The water heavily flows on the heading and walls of the opening. The Up to 50,0
of solid streams
water flows from the roof in the form of solid streams. Rainfall or
shower impression. The water head is not remarkable during the
flow. The sources of drip are the open fissures and cavities
Concentrated
water The water heavily flows in the form of streams from the cavities, Более 50,0
inflow
large open fissures or karst cavities
Water inflow nature

Visual characteristics

At the description of the watering nature the length of the sections with water inflows,
places of the water inflows (fissure, rocks contact), water head availability, number of
weighed particles should be indicated.
The value of the water inflow to the opening should be defined twice a month using the
measuring vessels, weir gauges, water-meters, or on the base of measuring of the water inflow
to the water collector of the water drainage pumping plant at the temporary stop of pumping.
6.4.2.8. The water samples for the chemical analysis of its composition and aggressiveness
should be taken:
- monthly from the sites of the underground waters inflows to control the change of their
chemical composition;
- at the uncovering of the new underground water stratum by the opening;
- at the places of the leakages through concrete lining to reveal the degree of the water
aggressiveness relating to the concrete.
6.4.3. Scope of works at the construction of facilities by cut-and-cover method
6.4.3.1. The scope of works includes elaboration of the состав работ входят составление
engineering-and-geological documentation on the pits and fixed surveillance of the walls and
lopes stability, underground waters regime, change in the characteristics of the grounds in the
pit bottom and walls.
Documentation on the pit should be conducted by the way of accretive sketching of the
walls, slopes, berms, and bottom, and should in detail describe the following:
- slopes conditions: height, slope angles, type of temporary shoring of the pit and its
conditions during the inspection, availability of the engineering-and-geological processes
(washaways, mud slides, screeses, collapses, suffusion);
- conditions of the pit bottom with evaluation of bearing ability of the grounds;
- underground waters inflow.
In case of application of open water drainage the amount of pumping water, its
temperature, and presence of weighed particles in the water should be indicated.
6.4.3.2. After the pit opening to the design mark the examination and commissioning of the
ground basement under the construction structure should be executed by the constructors’
call. The act of acceptance should reflect the characteristics of the grounds in foundation and
calculated nominal pressure on these grounds.
6.4.3.3. The fixed surveillance of the pit conditions should be conducted by the way of
periodical investigations of definite sections of its slopes and bottom with the purpose of
revelation of factors (geological, hydro-geological, mine technical, and others) decreasing the
stability of rocks in the pit slopes and bottom during the execution of works.
During the investigation process it is necessary:
- to measure the slope angles in different points and in different grounds, to register the
speed and reasons of the slopes flattening up to acquisition of stable conditions, to stipulate
the relation between the slope angles and the ground conditions, their consistency, density,
and the slope height;
- to register the type and conditions of the temporary shoring of the pit walls, nature of its
deformations (collapse, protrusion, crash, and roll), to evaluate the hazard from the revealed
faults of the shoring and to inform the administration of the construction site about it;
- to register the change of the hydro-geological conditions in the pit: occurrence and
Page 138 of 295

disappearance of springs, leaking of water in the slopes, development of the suffusion;
- to take the ground samples for the laboratory researches from the all lithological
differences, as from the pit walls, as from its bottom in every 50 - 100 m throughout the
opening length, or, where appropriate, to correct the bearing ability of the grounds in the
structure basement. In case of the ground waters inflow to the pit they should be sampled for
the chemical analysis.
6.4.4. Local monitoring of the environmental and natural-and-technical systems
6.4.4.1. At the sections with difficult engineering-and-geological conditions the local
monitoring of the surrounding components should be conducted, including the organization of
surveying of development of hazardous geological and hydro-geological processes, as well as
other factors negatively effecting on the stability of the constructed facilities and closely
situated buildings. The works should be conducted in correspondence with the program.
6.4.4.2. For execution of the geodesic monitoring the arrangement of the surface control
survey points network, for the geo-dynamical monitoring – the deep-earth control survey
points, for hydro-geological monitoring – hydro-survey wells should be provided.
6.4.4.3. The monitoring results should be used for timely definition of development of the
negative engineering-and-geological processes during the construction, and definition of
measures for their prevention.
6.4.5. Office processing of the results of engineering-and-geological works
6.4.5.1. During the process of initial office processing of the surveying materials the daily
transfer of the draft records made in the openings to the log-books and blanks of the
engineering-and-geological documentation being the main documents for subsequent
processing of the surveying results should be executed.
During the final processing of materials al surveys and analysis should be integrated and
included in the report containing the following:
- executive engineering-and-geological cross-sections;
- summaries of analysis and investigations of the grounds and underground waters;
- explanatory note.
6.4.5.2. The executive engineering-and-geological cross-sections should be compiled for
the first track tunnels or, in case they have different geological structure, for the first and
second track tunnels throughout the all length of the commissioning section using the data of
researches and surveys during the construction.
The cross-sections of tunnels should be compiled from the ground surface to the depth 10 15 m exceeding the depth of the tunnel bottom. The scale of the cross-sections should be:
horizontal - 1:2000, vertical - 1:200 (1:100).
In the cross-sections all data collected during the researches and construction should be
reflected: characteristics of grounds, their stability, type of linings, watering, negative
engineering-and-geological processes, and others.
The shaft cross-sections should be compiled in the vertical scale of 1:200 or 1:100 with
indication of the water inflows, types of linings, rings numeration, frozen grounds distribution
boundaries, and physical-mechanical properties of grounds.
The escalator tunnel cross-sections should be compiled at the scale of 1:200 or 1:500 with
indication of the same data with the ones made for the shafts.
6.4.5.3. The summaries should contain the characteristics of the grounds taken as from the
openings during the construction, as from the exploratory openings, made along the route
during the process of researches.
In the base of the summaries the statistical processing of the parameter values of all ground
types should be conducted.
The summaries of chemical composition of the underground waters with the abstract of
data on aggressiveness of water relating to the cement should be compiled for the each waterbearing stratum.
Page 139 of 295

6.4.5.4. The report including the executive engineering-and-geological cross-sections
should be sent to the construction organization and customer for submission at the
commissioning of the constructed object to the acceptance committee.
6.5. Cut-and-cover method of works
6.5.1. General provisions
6.5.1.1. Substantiation of the accepted method of works, organization of construction of
the temporary and permanent structures, types of the applied machines and equipment should
be reflected in the Construction Organization Project (COP).
6.5.1.2. Before the main CMW (construction and mounting works) start the participants of
the construction processа should execute the organizational-and-technological preparation by
the designation according to the clause 6.2 of the SNiP 32-02.
6.5.1.3. The under-crane ways should be constructed, as a rule, in correspondence with the
PB 10-382. The under-crane ways axis should be located, as a rule, symmetrically relating to
the pit axis. The ways slope should be no more than 0,002.
The cranes mounting should be executed according to the approved technological map.
6.5.1.4. Arrangement of the glued water-proofing by the method of melting of the roll
materials should be executed according to the VSN 104 and clause 5.20, other kinds of the
water-proofing – according to the TU (technical conditions) of their application.
6.5.2. Digging works, shoring of pits and trenches, preparation of the facilities’
foundations
6.5.2.1. The order of development of the pits, the slope grade of pits without shoring,
height of benches, allowable depth of pits with vertical walls without shoring should be
stipulated by calculation, or should be accepted according to the SNiP 3.02.01, and reflected in
the WEP (works execution project).
6.5.2.2. The method of artificial unwatering of the ground waters should be accepted in
correspondence with the COP. Location of the unwatering installations and facilities should
not prevent the operation of the digging equipment and transport vehicles.
6.5.2.3. In case the arrangement of the pit with slopes is impossible the vertical pit walls
shoring should be executed with arrangement of the enclosing walls made from the piles:
metal profile or tube piles run directly into the ground or into the preliminary drilled wells;
drill-injection piles; reinforced concrete cast-in-situ drill piles, of discrete, tangential, or
secant location; grooved piles; solid reinforced concrete executed by the technology of trench
walls in the ground, as well as using the reinforced ground mass (dowel joints, cementing,
thermal strengthening, freezing).
At the depth up to 5 m the additional shoring of the pit walls in the kind of buntons or
anchors, as a rule, is not required. On the big depths of the pits the parameters of the
additional shoring (number and location of the shoring tiers, step of shoring in the tier,
diameter of the buntons made from pipes, length of anchors, etc) should be defined by
calculation.
6.5.2.4. The calculation of the pile shoring of the pits should be executed according to the
Methodical Instructions [14].
The method of the piles run should be reflected in the WEP. The ranging of the pile
location for the pits should be executed from the structure axis with the accuracy of ± 15 мм.
The displacement of the piles from the design position on the level of the pit bottom should
not exceed 150 mm.
6.5.2.5. Before the pile run, as well as at the places of forthcoming works on the pits and
trenches uncovering the inspection of availability of the underground communications or
structure should be conducted. The places of location of the underground communications
should be fenced, and measures on their prevention from damage should be taken.
6.5.2.6. The construction organization should inform the operating organization about the
digging works with re-laying or re-arrangement of the underground communications no later
Page 140 of 295

than 7 days before the works start.
The operating organization should mark on the terrain the boundaries of these
communications before the beginning of the ground development.
6.5.2.7. It is recommended to execute the shoring of the pits using the ground anchors
according the Manual [15], and dower joints – according to the STP 013.
6.5.2.8. The composition and properties of the argillic solutions used at the application of
the «wall in ground» method should be accepted according to the SNiP 3.02.01 and STP 014.
The level of the argillic solution at the trench development should be no lower than 0,2 m
from the top of the trench head.
6.5.2.9. At the arrangement of the temporary drainage ditches on the surface the following
regulations should be observed:
- the cross-section and slopes of the temporary drainage ditches should be calculated on the
leakage of water during the rainfalls, from the snow melting, or on the mixed flow;
- longitudinal slope of the ditches should be no less than 0,003;
- the ditch edges should be arranged no less than 0,1m above the calculated water level;
- the distance from the pit edge to the edge of the nearest collecting ditch should be no less
than 3 m;
- the ground from ditches arranged in the slopes should be laid in the kind of toes along the
ditches from the downstream side;
- in case the collecting drainage ditches are located in the closed proximity to the pit the
triangular bench should be arranged between the ditch and pit surface of which should have
the slope of 0,02 - 0,04 toward the collecting ditch.
The water from the ditches should be discharged to the municipal water drainage network
or to the lowered places remote from the constructed or existing facilities; in this case the
waterlogging of the terrain or the ground washaway should not be allowed.
6.5.2.10. The pits should be developed with running by benches toward the higher design
marks of the pit bottom.
It is recommended to develop the upper part of the pit up to the mark of the site designated
for arrangement of the upper line of the pit wall shoring anchors using the excavator equipped
with back hoe, and to load the ground to the dump trucks.
6.5.2.11. The bottom part of the pit should be developed using the excavator and bulldozer
located in the pit. The height of the developed ground benches should be defined taking into
consideration the accepted marks of the sites designated for installation of the subsequent
lines of the pit wall shoring anchors.
6.5.2.12. At the development of the each bench of the pit the temporary water drainage
ditches with the slope no less than 0,02, and sumps for pumping of the inflowing water should
be arranged simultaneously. The bench bottom should have the slope of 0,02 - 0,04 toward
the temporary water drainage ditches.
6.5.2.13. In case of development of the ground using excavator at the setting of lagging by
excavator the ground developed by hand should be left near the piles.
6.5.2.14. The development of sands or cohesive soils in the bottom part of the pit changing
their properties under the water effect (after the dewatering) and weather impacts should be
executed with under-excavating of the ground regarding the design marks leaving the no less
than 0,3m height protective layer, with arrangement of temporary water drainage.
The protective layer removal should be executed directly before the arrangement of the
macadam mattress using bays dimensions of which should prevent the flooding or freezing of
the prepared foundation before the laying and compacting of the macadam mattress.
6.5.2.15. In the pits foundation of which consists from the sands or cohesive soils of hard
and half-hard consistence the protective layer cutting should be executed to the design marks
with the maximal deviation of ± 5 cm.
The cutting of the protective layer should be executed by excavators or bulldozers with
Page 141 of 295

simultaneous surfacing of the foundation and filling of the temporary water drainage ditches
with the local ground.
The surfaced foundation should be compacted using the vibratory roller.
6.5.2.16. In the pits with foundation from the watered fine and pulverescent sands or
hydromorphic cohesive soils the protective layer cutting should be executed with overexcavating of the ground regarding the design marks by 0,2 - 0,4 m depending on the ground
consistency factor.
The filling of the over-excavated area with crushed granite of 40 - 70 mm or 20 - 40 mm
fractions should be executed. The crushed granite should be compacted using the vibratory
roller: the first 4 - 6 runs by one track with switched-off vibrator, and then one-two runs with
vibration. Where appropriate, the crushed granite layer should be filled and surfaced to the
design marks, and additionally compacted by the vibratory roller with switched-off vibrator.
6.5.2.17. The amount of the over-excavated hydromorphic ground of the basement, and the
height of the pressed crushed rocks should be stipulated by experimental compacting of the
crushed rocks with participation of representative of the project organization, and should be
agreed with the customer.
On the surface of compacted crushed rocks the wave in front of the working wheel of the
roller should not occur at the control run of the roller with switched-off vibrator.
6.5.2.18. At the places where the opening foundation consists of the rocky or coarsely
clastic grounds not subjected to the weather impacts the development of the pit should be
executed straight to the design marks without the over-excavation or failures of the natural
composition of the foundation ground. The places of over-excavation should be filled with
local crushed rocks with their thorough compacting.
6.5.2.19. The layer of the concrete mattress should be laid on the prepared within the
working bay foundation.
6.5.2.20. The interruption between the completion of the pit development with preparation
of foundation and arrangement of the concrete mattress, as a rule, is not allowed. In case of
forced interruptions the measures on the prevention of deterioration of the pit bottom ground
quality should be taken.
6.5.2.21. At the execution of works in the pit it is necessary to control the shoring
conditions not allowing its deformations and failures. The each working shift should reflect
the shoring conditions in the working log-book.
6.5.2.22. The temporary disposal of the ground suitable for the backfilling should be
located at the places indicated in the COP.
6.5.2.23. The suitability of the fertile soil layer cutting during the digging works for use
should be defined according to the clause 5.18.
The fertile layer should be cut, as a rule, in the thawed state. Its cutting in winter conditions
is allowed only in case of substantiation in the COP.
At the cutting of the fertile layer deterioration of its quality – mixing with underlying
grounds, pollution with liquids or materials, etc - should be excluded
6.5.2.24. The storage of materials, moving of the transport vehicles and installation of the
construction machines should be provided outside the wedge of failure of unshored pits and
trenches.
At the development of the pit with slopes the distance from the nearest under-crane rail to
the edge of the pit should be no less than 2 m.
6.5.2.25. At the uncovering of the operating underground communications development of
the groundа by mechanized method is allowed at the distance no less than 2 m from the side
wall, and no less than 1 m over the top of the pipe, cable, etc. The remaining ground should be
developed by hand without application of any breaking instruments taking the measures
preventing the damage of these communications.
6.5.3. Erection of bearing structures made from prefabricated reinforced concrete
Page 142 of 295

6.5.3.1. At the mounting of the structures the required accuracy of mounting, spatial
stability of the structures during the process of their assembling and stability of the structure
in the whole, as well as intactness of executed part of the water-proofing should be provided.
6.5.3.2. At the installation of the structural elements the inventory slings, weight-handling
fixtures, conductors, and scaffolding should be applied.
The methods and places of strapping of the structures should provide the delivery of
structures to the place of installation (laying) in the design position.
The installation of the structures in the design position should be executed by the accepted
reference points: matchmarks, dowels, edges, etc.
6.5.3.3. The trough, wall, and foundation blocks of the structure should be installed on the
protective layer of water-proofing with grouting using the pliable combo.
6.5.3.4. The welded joints should correspond to the GOST 14098. The control and
commissioning of the welded joints should be conducted according to the GOST 10922.
The data regarding the welding works should be inserted in the welding works log-book
and registered by the concealed works acceptance acts.
6.5.3.5. The mark and flowability of the concrete or solution applied at the mounting of the
structures for the joint grouting should be accepted according to the project documentation.
The structures displaced from the mortar bed during the curing of the solution should be
pulled up, cleaned from the old solution and re-installed into the fresh solution.
6.5.3.6. At the installation of the runs their alignment by the height should be executed
using the wedges. The gaps between the bottom surface of the run and end faces of the
columns should be filled with fibrous concrete.
The laying of the flooring plates should be executed after the concrete in the grounted
joints of the trough and wall blocks, columns, and foundation blocks reaches no less than 70
% of the design hardness.
6.5.3.7. At the mounting of the elements of pre-fabricated reinforced concrete structures
the displacements from the design positions should not exceed allowances according to the
Appendix 6А.
6.5.4. Erection of bearing structures made from in-situ reinforced concrete
6.5.4.1. At the erection of the structures made from the cast-in-situ reinforced concrete the
complex mechanization of the production processes, application of the inventory traveling or
other multi-turn forms, prefabricated reinforcement cages and factory manufactured networks,
usage of ready mixed concretes produced by the automated concrete mixing machine,
concrete pumps, or concrete distributors should be provided. In the WEP the instructions
regarding the order and terms of conduction of activities on the concrete curing, consequence
and terms of removal of formworks should be included.
The surface of the cast-in-situ lining after the removal of formworks should net need in
additional processing.
6.5.4.2. The reinforcement bars cutting and bending, mounting and acceptance should be
executed according to the SNiP 3.03.01.
6.5.4.3. Installation of the formworks of the main structural elements should be executed
with the accuracy of ± 10 мм. The correctness of installation of the wall, columns and
flooring formworks and corresponding of the camber to the project documentation should be
checked instrumentally in every 5m by picketage, or at the each installation of the traveling
forms.
The correctness and reliability of the fastening of centrings and formworks should be
controlled by the mining surveyor and manager of the construction site with registration in the
working log-book.
6.5.4.4. The flowability of the concrete mixture measuring at the place of laying by the
value of settlement of the slump cone should be within, cm:
а) for non-armored or low-armored parts of the structures - 4 - 8;
Page 143 of 295

б) for moderate armored (from 0,5 to 2 %) - 8 - 12;
в) for high armored - 12 - 14.
The loss of flowability of the concrete mixture at its transportation should not exceed 30 40 % for mixtures having the flowability up to 8 cm settlement of the slump cone and 20 - 30
% for mixtures with flowability of 8 cm and more.
The composition of the concrete mixture during the working process should be
systematically controlled by the construction laboratory. The testing of flowability of the
concrete mixture should be conducted at the places of its preparation no less than twice per
working shift.
6.5.4.5. In case the mechanized delivery of the concrete directly to the required place is
impossible the height of free dropping of the concrete mixture from the bucket should not
exceed 2m, at the delivery to the arch part of the structure - 1 m. The supply of the concrete
mixture from the higher position should be provided on the inclined gutters or by vertical
elephant's trunks.
6.5.4.6. The concrete mixture should be laid by horizontal layers of the same thickness
with its sequential laying in one and the same direction at all layers.
The maximal thickness of the laid layer in case of use of hand-driven pervibrators should
not exceed 1,25 of the length of working part of vibrator.
6.5.4.7. The compacting of the laid concrete mixture by pervibrators at all parts of the
structure should be executed with observance of the following regulations:
- the step of relocation of vibrators should not exceed 1,5 of radius of their action;
- the vibrator should be deepened into the previously laid layer to 5 - 10 cm;
- the support of vibrators by reinforcement bars or inserts of the structures, as well as by
ties or other elements of their fastening is not allowed.
6.5.4.8. The height of the parts of walls concreting without the interruption should not
exceed 3 m. After this height is reached the interruptions for settlement of the concrete
mixture duration of which should be no less than 40 minutes and no more than 2 hours should
be made.
6.5.4.9. The laying of the concrete mixture to the arch part of structures should be executed
symmetrically from the arch shoe to the crown. The working joints planes should be
perpendicular to the arch surface. The bordering of the concreting band should be provided by
means of installation of networks.
6.5.4.10. The duration of the interruptions at the concreting for arrangement of the working
joints should be defined by the laboratory. The next laying of the mixture is allowed after the
laid concrete reaches the hardness no less than 0,15 MPa. At the continuation of concreting
the surface of concrete in the joints should be cleaned from the cement film without damage
of concrete.
6.5.4.11. During the initial period of hardening the concrete should be prevented from the
impacts, jarrings, and other mechanical damages, the temperature-and-humidity regime
should be maintained.
The concrete surfaces not designated for later solid-casting with concrete or solution
should be covered with film-formation compositions or protective films instead of overlay
and ponding.
6.5.4.12. In the winter period at the decrease of temperature below the design value the
cured concrete should be additionally encased for warmth-keeping or heated to acquire the
hardness at which its freezing can be allowed.
The artificial heating of the cast-in-situ concrete and reinforced concrete structures should
be provided according to the SNiP 3.02.01.
6.5.4.13. The movement of people on the concreted structures, as well as installation of
formworks on them is allowed after the concrete reaches the hardness no less than 0,15 МPа.
Loading of the structures is allowed after the concrete reaches the design hardness, or
Page 144 of 295

according to the calculation.
6.5.4.14. At the laying of the concrete 3 reference samples should be prepared from the
each 50 m3 of the laid concrete mixture near the place of laying. The samples should be kept
in the temperature-and-humidity conditions similar to the conditions of the concrete
hardening.
The reference samples should be taken according to the SNiP 3.03.01.
The testing of the concrete hardness, freeze resistance, and water-proofing should be
executed according to the GOST 10060.0, GOST 10060.4, and GOST 10180.
6.5.4.15. The process of execution of the concrete and reinforced concrete works should be
reflected in the log-book according to the Appendix 7.2B.
6.5.4.16. At the execution of works by the «wall in ground» method the trench bottom
should be cleaned from the sediments before the beginning of its filling with concrete or
reinforced concrete structures.
6.5.4.17. The concreting of the «wall in ground» under the protection of the slurry should
be executed using the vertically moving pipe by separate bays length of which should be
defined in the WEP. The concreting should start no later than in 8 h after the driving of trench
for one bay.
The applied concrete should have fineness of aggregate up to 50 mm and slump cone
settlement of 15 - 20 sm.
The structure of restraints between the bays should take up the concrete pressure and
provide the design water-proofing of joints.
6.5.5. Backfilling of pits
6.5.5.1. Material for the backfilling of pits should be accepted according to the COP.
The grounds used for filling of the pits should be ecologically pure, should not contain
fertile layer, wood, or other organic inclusions, water-soluble salts. The size of the hard
inclusions should not exceed 15 cm. Application of argillic grounds of flow and very soft
consistence is not allowed.
6.5.5.2. The pit filling grounds should be compacted to the design density γск.пр defined by
the formula
γск.пр = Куγmax,
where Ку is the compacting factor according to the design data;
γmax is the maximal density of the soil skeleton obtained in the standard compacting device
according to the GOST 22733.
In case of unavailability of the design Ку its value should be equal to:
а) for the not built up, non used for arrangement of the road carpets territories, and the ones
located outside the underground communications area - 0,90 - 0,92;
b) for the streets with uncovering of the road carpet and for the places of crossing of roads
with upgraded carpet - от 0,95 до 0,98;
c) for the places of crossing of the underground communications - 0,98.
6.5.5.3. To reach the maximal effectiveness the compacting of the grounds should be
executed at their optimal moisture content W0 defined in the laboratory researches. In case of
unavailability of the laboratory data the W0 should be accepted:
а) for the argillic grounds compacted using the roller - W0 = Wp;
b) the same compacted by tamping - W0 = Wp (Wp = 0,01 - 0,03), where Wp is the moisture
content at the lower limit of plasticity (rolling-out limit);
c) for the coarse-grained and average-grained sands - 0,08 - 0,12;
d) for the fine-grained and pulverescent sands - 0,12 - 0,18.
6.5.5.4. At the places of filling the water-proofing of the structure executed from the
combo should have the hardness in correspondence with WEP.
Before the filling all communications between the pile shoring of the pit and protective
water-proofing should be removed. The buntons or removable parts of anchors and
Page 145 of 295

longitudinal chords should be removed during the process of filling.
Filling of the cavities in case of availability of water, ice, snow, construction wastes, and
foreign matters in them is not allowed.
Permission for the pit filling should be documented by act.
6.5.5.5. The backfilling of the pits should be executed evenly on two sides of the structure
by horizontal layers with the layer-by-layer compacting of the ground to the design hardness.
The thickness of the layers should be stipulated on the base of the ground type and
compacting ability of the compacting materials.
6.5.5.6. The grounds or industrial wastes different by their composition and moisture
content during the process of backfilling and screeding should be evenly distributed within the
all filled area.
6.5.5.7. The additional wetting of the ground, where appropriate, should be executed in the
places of disposal by means of ponding to the ground of calculated amount of water. For the
grounds well soaking the water the additional wetting can be executed after the screeding of
the layer.
6.5.5.8. The cavities between the pit shoring and vertical walls and structure of the facility
should be filled with coarse-grained and average-grained sands or other low-compressible
grounds.
The compacting of the sandy grounds can be executed by ponding.
6.5.5.9. The structures located above the flooring can be filled after the acceptance of
works on compacting of the ground in the pit cavities.
The thickness of the ground layer above the structure flooring should be no less than 0,5m
for passing of the ground-compacting machines on it.
6.5.5.10. At the execution of backfilling in winter period the special attention should be
paid to the keeping of thawed state of the ground. The works should be executed with the
intensity providing the compacting of the laid ground before its freezing.
6.6. Closed method of works
6.6.1. General provisions
6.6.1.1. During the process of driving of the openings the systematical visual control of the
correspondence of the real engineering-and-geological conditions to the design values relating
to the headway stability, change of thickness or composition of the stratification grounds,
their fissuring, and quantitative change of the ground waters inflow should be conducted.
The survey results should be inserted in the log-book - Appendix 7.2А. The project
organization and customer should be informed about the deviation of the real conditions of
driving from the design data.
6.6.1.2. At the approach of the opening heading to the area of fractures, under-river
sections, and buried washaways, and during the process of driving of these areas the activities
providing the safety of works stipulated by COP should be executed.
6.6.1.3. The grouting of cavities under the pre-fabricated lining should be executed by
means of injection of the solution with additives correcting its properties. The primary
injection should be conducted in the grounds of low stability to the each laid ring; in the stable
grounds and in the average stability grounds it is allowed to execute the injection with delay
in correspondence with the COP instructions, but by no more than three rings.
The reference injection should be executed at the distance no less than 25m and no more
than 50m from the heading.
The characteristics of the solution should be stipulated in the COP, the composition of the
solution – in the WEP according to the VSN 132.
6.6.1.4. The discrepancy between the axes of counter headways should not exceed 100
mm.
6.6.2. Construction of shafts
6.6.2.1. At the construction of shafts with mounting of the rings from below the over-shaft
Page 146 of 295

complex of the equipment designated for servicing of the main tunnel works should be used.
6.6.2.2. Construction of the collar section of the shaft should be executed in the open pit.
The concrete should be laid to the collar structure after the installation of sheathes for
engineering communications, and at the drop shaft method – after the installation of backfill
tubes for filling of cavities in the structure foundation, anchorage pillars and fastening bolts of
the guiding bars as well. The correctness of installation of the embedded items should be
checked by the surveying service and registered by the concealed works acceptance act.
6.6.2.3. The laying of concrete to the structure should be executed layer-by-layer, and
evenly by all perimeter with systematical control of the embedded items and formworks
position.
The stripping of the structure formwork is allowed when the concrete reaches no less than
50 % of the design hardness. The pit cavities filling should be executed after the removal of
the external formwork only.
The shaft lining should rise over the construction site level by no less than 0,5 m.
6.6.2.4. The depth of round at the driving of shafts in non-rocky grounds with the
mounting of the lining rings from below should not more than 10 - 15 cm exceed the width of
the ring. The low stability grounds (Table 6.4.2) should be developed in two rounds by 50 - 60
cm, beginning from the center of the heading and ending at the internal surface of the liner
fastening, with final cutting of the ground while mounting of liners. The temporary fastening
should be executed in the kind of the wood board tie.
In the area of totally unstable grounds the methods of their shoring should be provided in
correspondence with the COP.
In case of availability of the ground waters inflow the shaft driving should be conducted
with advance water drainage.
6.6.2.5. At the driving of shafts with preliminary freezing of the grounds at the each round
the ground within the non-frozen core should be developed first, and then the frozen ground
should be developed.
At the development of the ground inside the ice soil wall the water remaining in the nonfrozen conditions should be removed. In case of considerable water inflow to the heading due
to availability of defects in the ice soil wall the works should be temporary stopped, the shaft
should be flooded up to the level of the ground waters, and additional freezing of the ground
waters should be conducted.
6.6.2.6. At the driving of shafts with cast-in-situ concrete lining in the low stability
grounds the temporary support should be executed from the metal rings installed no less than
in every 1m, with the wood board tie of the surface, or from the shotcreting on the metal net.
The suspension of the rings should be executed using the steel hooks on the basis of no less
than two hooks per each segment. The anchor jacks should be installed between the rings in
the amount equal to the number of hooks.
All cavities under the wooden tie should be thoroughly backfilled.
6.6.2.7. At the construction of shafts in the watered or artificially frozen grounds the waterproofing works should be executed during the process of the tunneling works. The full bolt
sets with hydro-insulating washers should be installed at the mounting of the linings, and the
control injection should be conducted in the closed proximity to the heading from the
suspended scaffold. The control injection, tightening of bolts, replacement of the bolt sets, if
necessary, as well as calking of the lining joints should be conducted from the temporary
working scaffolds.
At the driving of shafts using the drill and blast works (DBW) the calking works should be
executed at the distance of 20 - 30 m from the heading.
The working shafts in case of unavailability of the water inflow can be constructed without
the water-proofing.
6.6.2.8. Concreting of the cast-in-situ linings of the shaft should be executed in the
Page 147 of 295

traveling formwork by 4 - 6 m sections. Location of the formwork should be controlled by the
surveying services at the each moving. Position of the shaft walls relating to the vertical axis
should be checked in every two-three cycles of the formwork moving.
Moving of the formwork to the next round is allowed after the concrete reaches the
compressive resistance no less than 0,8 МPа.
At the higher requirements to the hardness, water-proofing, and corrosion resistance of the
concrete linings the concrete mixture after its production should be transported in buckets
preventing deterioration of the mixture properties.
6.6.2.9. Displacement of the cast-in-situ concrete lining walls by the radius from the shaft
center should be within 50 mm, and the size of benches at the place of adjacent rounds contact
should be no more than 30 mm.
6.6.2.10. Installation of buntons of the shaft equipment, ventilation pipelines, and
arrangement of staircases should be executed during the process of the tunneling works.
Ventilation pipelines laid up to the suspended scaffold should be rigid, and from the
suspended scaffold to the heading - flexible.
The shaft equipment in case of its driving with installation of guides for cage lifting can be
executed at the non-frozen grounds only.
6.6.2.11. The works on the construction of shafts by the drop shaft method or using the
special methods should be executed in correspondence with the SNiP 3.02.01 and clause 6.7.
6.6.2.12. The temporary structures and equipment necessary for the shaft driving by the
method of penetration in thixotropic jacket can be placed within the wedge of failure at the
provision of their normal operation in case of possible deformation of ground only.
The method of fastening of the drop shaft axes on the terrain should provide the possibility
of checking of their position at any moment of penetration. The control survey points for the
vertical marks control should be installed outside the area of possible settlements and moving
of the ground.
6.6.2.13. At the shaft driving by the method of penetration in thixotropic jacket the quality
of assembling of the cutter part and mounting of rings within the bearing collar should be
inspected by the technical supervision with participation of the representative of surveying
services, and should be confirmed by the concealed works acceptance act.
6.6.2.14. Development of the ground at the driving of shaft by the drop shaft method
should be executed by the jib crane equipped with grab bucket. Simultaneous development of
the ground using the mechanized handheld instrument and its removing from the shaft using
grab bucket is not allowed.
6.6.2.15. The penetration should be executed simultaneously with development of the
heading while removal of ground. To prevent the ground collapse behind the shoring the
timely supply of the slurry into the space formed by the bench of cutter part should be
provided, so that to keep constantly the slurry level 2m above the bearing collar bottom.
To prevent the slurry breakthrough the shaft in the unstable grounds area the cutter part of
the shoring should be constantly impressed into the ground by no less than 0,5 m, and ground
should be developed by 0,3 - 0,5 m layers, not allowing the running of the middle section of
the heading ahead of the bottom edge of the cutter. In the argillic grounds running of the
middle part of the heading ahead of the bottom edge of the cutter more than by 0,5 m is not
allowed.
6.6.2.16. At the crossing of the completely unstable grounds area penetration of shoring
should be executed under the layer of water in the shaft no less than 1m exceeding the level of
the water-bearing stratum. Removal of the ground in this case should be executed from the
middle section of heading with remaining by the opening contour berm cutting with the
penetration of shoring. The water drainage is allowed after the penetration of the cutter part
into the confining layer to the depth no less than 1,5 m below the mass of the water-bearing
grounds only.
Page 148 of 295

For the period of the shaft driving the facilities of prompt water supply to the shaft to
provide, where appropriate, its emergency flooding should be available.
6.6.2.17. The check of the drop shaft verticality and position in plane should be conducted
after the each fit of shoring and no less than in every 1m while it is dropping. The noticed
displacements and warpings should be immediately corrected.
6.6.2.18 Grouting of the under-shoring space filled with thixotropic solution should be
executed after the shaft driving by means of replacement of the slurry with combo. In separate
cases, in case of substantiation, the slurry can be left under the shoring.
6.6.2.19. At the mounting of rings of the lining penetrated in the thixotropic jacket the
bolted fastenings and plugs in the openings designated for the injection should be installed
with water-proofing washers and the joints between the liners should be tightened with the
tarred rope. The calking works should be executed after the completion of the shaft driving.
Repair of the water-proofing should be executed after the completion of the shaft driving.
6.6.2.20. The shaft equipment should be executed after the completion of the waterproofing repair.
To mount the equipment the control tier should be installed. Mounting of the equipment
should be executed, as a rule, from the top downward. At the mounting in the opposite
direction the control tier should be installed additionally at the shaft bottom level.
The control of the geometric parameters of the equipment is executed by the results of the
surveying photography.
6.6.2.21. At the mounting of the shaft equipment the following allowances should be
applied:
а) deviation of the distances between the bunton tiers - ± 15 mm;
б) difference between the marks of the bunton ends at the places of its fastening to the
liners – no more than 1:200 of its length;
в) deviation of the buntons located at two adjacent tiers from their vertical plane - ± 5 mm;
г) deviation of the each string of the bidirectional conductors from the vertical - ± 5 mm;
д) displacement of the conductor seams from the center of the bunton edge - 50 mm;
е) deviation of the equipment system from the design vertical position – no more than
1:2000 of the shaft depth.
The conductors should be precisely connected at the seams by their ends without shifts.
6.6.2.22. Laying of cables should be executed after the completion of mounting works in
the shaft. Embedding of cable to the shaft should be executed using the ropes; the cable
should be firmly fastened to the rope in every 6m.
6.6.3. Construction of the main line tunnels
6.6.3.1. Mounting of the shied in the mounting chamber should be executed by the fixed
longitudinal axis of the tunnel and normal to it. The centers of the cross-section of the cutting
edge and tail shell of the shield should be located at the geometric axis of the shield with
deviations no more than ± 10 mm. Their ellipticity is allowed to be no more than ± 5 mm.
6.6.3.2. Deviation of the shield from the design position in plane and profile should be
within the range providing the mounting of linings with allowances according to the
Appendix 6А.
6.6.3.3. The tunneling with application of the shield complexes should be conducted by the
one ring width cuts. Injection of the grouting solution under the lining should be executed
under the every assembled ring or through the pipes in the shield shell during its moving.
6.6.3.4. The tunneling with compensation of pressure in the near-heading area by the
mechanized shields providing the stability of surrounding ground mass should be executed
using the active hydraulic or ground pressure on the heading.
6.6.3.5. The composition of the bentonite solution depending on the engineering-andgeological conditions of the construction site and characteristics of the bentonite powder
should be defined for the each specific case.
Page 149 of 295

6.6.3.6. For the tunneling in the sands above the level of the ground waters it is possible to
use the partially mechanized tunneling complexes with splitting sites in the shields. Such
tunneling complexes should be applied with pre-fabricated linings or with the linings made
from cast-in-situ pressed concrete.
6.6.3.7. At the mounting of the cast-in-situ pressed linings the characteristics of the
concrete mixture should be accepted according to the COP. The mixture should be laid evenly
by the both sides from the formwork, and formation should be executed by the uniform
pressure of the pressing unit in two stages:
а) at the first stage – up to 0,3 - 0,5 МPа during 3 - 6 minutes;
б) at the second stage – with maximum reglamented pressure during the period stipulated
by WEP.
During the period of laying and formation the concrete mixture should have the flowability
within 5 - 11 cm of the slump cone settlement.
6.6.3.3. The lining made from the cast-in-situ pressed concrete should have the tight
contact with the surrounding ground, should have well-filled joints between the separate
sections of the linings without any fractures, fissures, flowaways, benches, or other defects.
The total area of pockets having the depth no more than 20 mm should not exceed 100 cm2
per each 5 m2 of the surface linings.
6.6.3.9. At the rock tunneling method of works the underground openings should be shored
by temporary shoring in correspondence with the certificate, with tight backfilling of cavities
between the shoring elements and ground.
The elements of temporary wooden shoring should be removed while the lining is
mounted, or during the laying of the concrete mixture under the formware. It is allowed to
leave them under the lining in case of their jamming, or at the possibility of the ground inrush.
6.6.3.10. The main line tunneling with pre-fabricated lining in the stable and average
stability grounds should be executed using the mechanized complexes allowing to conduct the
development of the ground by the shearer or drill and blast method with machine drilling of
the heading, or drilling with application of the partially mechanized complexes with
development of the ground using the handheld mechanized tools and drill and blast method.
The list of complexes used in the different conditions is represented in the Appendix 6.6А.
Development of the ground by the drill and blast method should be executed according to
the SNiP 3.02.01, SNiP 3.02.03, and PB 13-407, as a rule, using the perimeter blasting (trim
blasting) technique. For each heading the certificate of drill and blast works should be
compiled.
6.6.3.11. At the tunneling using the up-to-date tunneling mechanized shield complexes it is
recommended to apply the circular pre-fabricated reinforced concrete linings, consisting of
the ring of one standard size suitable as for the straight sections as for curve sections of the
route in plane and profile.
N o t e – The lining ring structure generality is achieved due to its variable width. The lining ring ends are
formed by two non-parallel planes: one plane is perpendicular to the ring axis, the second one is inclined to it so
that the width of the ring by the key block axis (by external diameter) is a few less than the width of the ring by
its axis, and from the opposite side of the ring – a few more. The lining structure in the section of splitting to the
blocks should be correlated with the structure of the shield complex. The number and location of the shield jacks
provide the support of their shoes by the block bodies outside the joints at the any allowable turn of the lining
rings against each other.

6.6.3.12. Injection of the grouting solution under the rings of the pre-fabricated linings
should be executed with preliminary filling of the gap between the end part of the assembled
ring and ground with compacting material. The joints between the lining elements should be
tightened.
6.6.3.13. The control injection under the lining made from the cast iron liners should be
executed before the joints calking at the pressure up to 1 МPа, and under the lining made
from the reinforced concrete blocks – at the pressure no more than 0,6 МPа after the partial
Page 150 of 295

tightening of the joints with calking material.
6.6.3.14. Concreting of the cast-in-situ concrete linings of the tunnels constructed by the
method of full hole drilling of by sections should be executed according to the SNiP 3.03.01,
VSN 48, and 6.5.4.
Injection under the cast-in-situ concrete or reinforced concrete lining should be executed in
correspondence with the WEP.
In the grounds bringing the strata pressure the temporary shoring should be installed taking
into consideration the construction margin from the external outline of the lining.
6.6.3.15. At the construction of tunnel according to the NATM (New Austrian Tunneling
Method) the following should be provided:
- mechanized development of the ground using the tunneling machines, or by the drill and
blast method;
- shotcreting for temporary shoring of the opening with the control of its stress and strain
state;
- arrangement of the permanent concrete or reinforced concrete linings.
Before the arrangement of the permanent linings, where appropriate, the water-proofing
from the film materials should be laid on the temporary shotcreting.
The shotcreting for temporary shoring of the opening can be armored with metal net,
fibers, or can be applied in combination with anchors or arches. Installation of the arches and
armored net should be executed after the insertion of leveling shotcreting with the thickness
no less than 2 - 3 cm.
Calculation of the bearing shotcreting layer and its usage in combination with anchors and
arches should be executed according to the VSN 126.
6.6.3.16. At the application of the shotcreting in combination with arches the final
development of ground under their bottoms should be executed using the handheld
mechanized tool by the surveying mark.
The allowable displacement of the installed arch from the design position should be no
more than 25 mm.
The design shotcreting layer should be inserted on the armored net compressed by the arch
to the leveling layer.
The shotcreting setting period of should be accepted within the range 60 - 150 s. Its
compressive resistance in 6 min should be no less than 0,1 МPа, in 15 min - 0,2 МPа, and
with the following two-fold time increments (30 min, 1 h, 2 h) should increase by 0,1 МPа.
6.6.3.17. For the shotcreting the machines with adjustable mixture feed rate should be
used. The feed rate and pressure in the machine should be defined by experiment. The
maximal size of coarse particles of the fillers should be accepted taking into consideration the
technical specifications of the machine, but no more than 15 mm. The distance from the
nozzle to the concreting surface should be within 1,0 - 1,5 m.
At the laying of the water-proofing on the shotcreting surface the local inequalities at the
check using the two-meter rod (in case of the bent surface – by generatrix) should not exceed
5 cm.
6.6.3.18. Before the insertion of the leveling and design shotcreting layers to increase the
bond value the surface should be treated with special composition.
The minimal temperature of the fillers and gauging water at the shotcreting should not be
less than +15 °С.
6.6.3.19. It is recommended to use as the additives accelerating the concrete bonding at the
shotcreting the composition from the alkali silicate (sodium silicate with silica modulus of 2,8
- 3,2, density of 1,4 - 1,46 g/cm3 according to the GOST 13078) and the «Alfa» product
according to the TU 11, or other compositions.
The composition and amount of the complex additive should be defined in laboratory
depending on the required bonding period, speed of the strength generation, ground watering,
Page 151 of 295

temperature of fillers, method of the additive feeding at the addition of water to a concrete
mix. The composition of the additive should be corrected for the each batch of the alkali
silicate.
6.6.3.20. The dry mixture for the shotcreting should be manufactured at the factory by the
developed receipt. The mixture with the natural humidity (but no more than 6 %) should be
prepared in the forcing concrete mixer during 1,5 - 2,0 min, and should be transported to the
construction site in mixers.
The fillers and binding agent should be mixed in the forcing mixer during no less than 1,5
min close to the place of the concrete mixture insertion.
At the preparation of the dry mixture the incoming quality control of the cement, fillers,
additives, and composition of shotcreting should be executed, and during the concreting
process its insertion regime, early and design strength, and design water-proofing control
should be conducted.
6.6.3.21. At the application of NATM the deformation of walls and roof of opening should
be controlled with the measurement of the loads acting on the temporary shoring and the
deformations caused by these loads.
6.6.3.22. On the local and general temporary shoring and permanent lining deformations
measurement results their stress conditions and sufficiency of their bearing ability should be
evaluated. Where appropriate, additional calculations should be conducted, the design model,
temporary shoring operating modes, parameters of materials and structure of the shoring
should be corrected.
6.6.3.23. Arrangement of the water-proofing and concreting of the permanent lining should
be executed after the stabilizing of the mode of deformation of the temporary shoring.
The water-proofing should be executed using the special trolley after the cleaning of the
shotcreting surface from the dirt, fins, floating of pockets with combo.
During the process of laying of the water-proofing its quality should be controlled,
especially at the joints and at the places of the water-proofing fastening to the surface of the
temporary shoring.
6.6.3.24. Reinforcement of the permanent lining should be executed using the nets or
frames with the mass no more than 75 kg with installation by hand and connection of the
joints by the fastening wire. The special hangers, plastic brackets and springs, and combo
goods should be used as the reinforcing rod spacer.
At the execution of the reinforcement works the measures on the prevention of the laid
water-proofing damage should be taken.
6.6.3.25. Concreting of the trough part of the permanent lining should be conducted by 4 6m length sections with curing of the concrete in the formwork during 2 - 3 days. It is
recommended to execute the concreting of the walls and roof with 8 - 12 m retardation from
the concreting of the trough simultaneously by 4 - 6 m sections using the inventory traveling
or moving formwork.
6.6.3.26. It is recommended to lay the concrete under the formwork in two stages – first
symmetrically by the both sides at the height up to 3,5 m approximately, and then to the
remaining part of the walls and roof.
At the air temperature in the underground opening less than 10 °С to provide the strength
generation of the concrete during the given period the concrete mixture should be heated so
that the mixture temperature during the process of laying be equal no less than 10 °С.
6.6.3.27. The stripping of formwork of the walls and roof should be executed after the
concrete reaches 70 % of the design hardness. The surface of the concrete lining after the
stripping of formwork should be periodically wetted: first in 2 - 3 hours after the stripping of
formwork, then once per day during no less than 7 days.
6.6.3.23. The structure of the isolation joints and distance between them should be
accepted in correspondence with the project.
Page 152 of 295

6.6.4. Construction of stations
6.6.4.1. Construction of the three-vault stations should be executed by the sequential
station tunneling – first the side tunnels, then the middle one. Tunneling of the second by the
time side tunnel should be conducted with no less than 30m retardation relating of the first
one, and the middle one with no less than 50m retardation relating the second side tunnel.
To provide the coincidence of rings of all tunnels by picketage their tunneling should be
conducted in one and the same direction.
6.6.4.2. The rock tunneling by American method (full section) is allowed in the stable or
average stability grounds.
In case of pressure from the heading crown the tunnel should be constructed with
preliminary driving of the pilot-tunnels, heading-and-bench method if it is allowed taking into
consideration the accepted constructive solution of the station, or using the shields.
At the construction of tunnels in the low stability or completely unstable grounds the
special methods or special equipment should be applied. The methods of the ground
development depending on the ground properties should be accepted according to the COP.
6.6.4.3. The tunneling should be conducted by the cuts of one tunnel lining ring width. The
tunneling by the two-ring cuts is allowed in case of availability of previously driven pilottunnels. At the 1m width of the pilot-tunnel rings, and 0,75m width of the station tunnel rings
for mounting of one ring of the station tunnel two cuts should be executed, and for mounting
of two rings – three cuts.
6.6.4.4. Assembling of the first rings for mounting of tubing erector or erector arm tunnel
driver should be executed by the rock tunneling method using the draw-works.
Mounting of the pre-fabricated linings, columns, and other elements of bearing structures
should be executed with application of the mechanical tubing erectors or erector arm tunnel
drivers.
6.6.4.5. The initial injection should be conducted under the each mounting ring by the
whole outline.
6.6.4.6. At the construction of column stations the side tunnels driving should be
conducted taking into consideration the possible subsequent displacement of their axes toward
the station axis at the middle tunnel driving.
Driving of the middle tunnels of pier and column types should be executed taking
measures against deformation of the side tunnels by the way of installation of flying shores,
tie bars, etc.
6.6.4.7. At the laying of rings of the pre-fabricated tunnel lining the deviation of the real
dimensions from the design ones should not exceed the stipulated allowances.
6.6.4.8. The single-vault stations with pre-fabricated and cast-in-situ linings in stable and
average stability grounds should be constructed by the rock tunneling method beginning from
the arrangement of the bearing parts of the vault. The upper vault of the station should be
erected in the calotte opening; the lower vault should be constructed after the development of
the ground in the structure core.
The bearing parts of vaults should be constructed in the previously driven tunnels or adits.
The adits cross-section should be enough for laying of haulage tracks in them after the
arrangement of the station supports.
6.6.4.9. Construction of linings of the single-vault stations with precast vaults extruded into
the rock in the low stability ground is allowed with application of the advance protective
blanket. Development of the rock under its protection should be executed by excavator,
tunneling machine, or with application of the blast method.
6.6.4.10. Construction of the lining of stations with application of the steel-reinforced
concrete structures should start from the preliminary mounting of structures from the metal
blocks which after the welding among them form the bearing structure replacing the
formwork.
Page 153 of 295

6.6.4.11. Laying of the concrete to the supports of the single-vault stations should be
executed by separate sections with continuous supply of concrete. In case of interruptions in
the work the concrete surface should be treated by hacking with washing before the next
concreting. The joints between the concreting sections should not coincide with the ring joints
of the pre-fabricated lining of the vault, or with the sections of concreting of the cast-in-situ
vault.
The stripping of formwork of the supports should be conducted after the concrete reaches
no less than 15 % of the design hardness.
Construction of the upper vault should be started when the concrete of supports reaches no
less than 75 % of the design hardness.
6.6.4.12. In case of the pre-fabricated lining of the vault the blocks should be laid
alternately by one block on the one and other side of the vault.
To facilitate the installation of the keyblock of the next vault arch it is recommended to
compact first the joints between the blocks using the hydraulic advancing cylinder installed
instead of the keyblock with the 30 - 40 ton-force.
Before the initial release of arch the each block should be wedged out to the tie or directly
to the roof in no less than 4 points evenly by its length. To prevent the protrusion of the arch
from the plane toward the heading the blocks should be strutted to the heading crown using
the screw jack, or should be pulled by turnbuckles to the previously installed arches.
6.6.4.13. Release of the each arch should be executed in two stages by the way of injection
of the cement slurry to the keyblock jacks. The initial release of arch should be conducted
directly after its mounting and wedge-out, the final release – after the filling of cavities under
the arch by the injection of grouting solutions, but no later than in 6h after the beginning of
injection under the given arch.
6.6.4.14. At the mounting of the upper vault arches the vertical ellipticity is allowed only.
The height mark of the vault crown after the initial release of arch should not exceed the
design mark more than by 75 mm.
6.6.4.15. Injection of the combo should be conducted, as a rule, under the arch group (2-3
arches) by the vault outline, beginning from its lower part.
6.6.4.16. Before the mounting of the precast lower vault the surface of the opening should
be leveled with the sand coarse or concrete bedding with the thickness of 5 - 10 cm.
At the mounting of the next vault the blocks should be laid sequentially by the both sides
in the direction from the key to the supports with installation of temporary basket with
hydraulic advancing cylinder designated for sealing of the joints between the blocks instead of
keyblock.
6.6.4.17. Concreting of the cast-in-situ steel-reinforced concrete vault should be executed
after the full completion of the metal structure mounting with the welding works within the
concreting area of the vault according to the clause 6.5.4 by the specially developed
reglament.
6.6.5. Construction of escalator tunnels
6.6.5.1. The WEP on the construction of the escalator tunnel should be correlated with the
project of construction of the station in the whole.
6.6.5.2. The collar of the escalator tunnel for mounting of the tubing erector should be
constructed in the open pit with shoring of its walls. The pit should be developed with the
slope toward the tunnel to the depth allowing to mount the first two rings of the lining, and in
case of availability of the ground waters – to the depth no less than 0,5m exceeding their
level. At the pit bottom slope planned under the 30° angle the concrete trough being the
foundation for the first rings of the lining and subsequent half-rings of the temporary cap
should be arranged.
6.6.5.3. The first two rings of the lining should be fixed with concrete laid between the
rings and pit walls. Deviations of the real dimensions from the design ones should correspond
Page 154 of 295

to the stipulated allowances.
The half-rings necessary for mounting of the erector arm tunnel driver should be assembled
on the concrete basement of the pit; the first full temporary rings should be mounted by tubing
erector.
6.6.5.4. It is allowed to begin the tunneling works in the frozen grounds area only after
formation of closed ice-and-ground barrier of the design thickness and hardness. The
permission should be approved by act.
6.6.5.5. The escalator tunneling should be conducted by the full profile. In case of
availability of the under-located horizontal opening adjacent to the escalator tunnel it is
allowed to conduct the tunneling with drift or wells.
6.6.5.6. Development of the ground in the heading should be conducted from the top
downward by one ring runs with one or several benches with obligatory lagging of roof, and,
if necessary, heading crown, according to the certificate of the opening shoring.
6.6.5.7. Development of ground in the frozen area should be executed taking the preventive
measures against the damage of freezing pipes slanted toward the tunnel section, and release
of the brine. In case of finding of such pipes they should be disconnected from the distributor
and collector, the brine should be released, and protrusive into the opening pipe should be cut.
6.6.5.8. At the mounting of linings outside the frozen grounds area the full bolt sets should
be installed, and in the area of frozen grounds - temporary bolts with flat steel washers, with
their replacement with full bolt sets during the execution of water-proofing works.
6.6.5.9. Solutions for injection in the frozen grounds area should be applied with additives
preventing their freezing and accelerating the curing.
The control injection under the lining and installation of plugs with water-proof washers
into the holes for injection in the frozen grounds area should be finished before their melting.
At the arrangement of the auxiliary adit in the bottom part of the tunnel it’s driving should
be conducted from the station opening from the bottom upwards at the level of the tunnel
trough. The adit should be divided by the width to two sections with partition. In the section
designated for removal of ground the timber culvert sheathed with sheet steel should be
installed, in the other section the staircase for the people passage should be installed.
6.7. Special methods of works
6.7.1. Dewatering
6.7.1.1. Dewatering should be applied for lowering of the level or decreasing of the ground
waters inflow at the construction of underground structures, as well as for relieving of the
water head in the underlying water-bearing stratum.
Selection of the dewatering facilities should be defined taking into consideration:
- technology of the structure and type of opening;
- hydro-geological conditions;
- necessary lowering of level or decrease of the ground waters inflow;
- urban development situation, availability of dewatering underground communications in
the affected area;
- period of dewatering.
6.7.1.2. At the development of the WEP analysis of probable negative effects on the
environment connected with application of dewatering should be conducted: damage of
buildings, structures, engineering communications, settlements of ground; damage of the
wooden underground structure resulting from their drying.
6.7.1.3. During the dewatering process, as well as at the restoration of natural parameters
of the ground waters the constant control of the buildings, structures, and communications’
conditions using the observation stations should be conducted.
6.7.1.4. The following should be applied as the dewatering facilities:
- unwatering wells;
- light well point systems;
Page 155 of 295

- ejection units;
- absorbing wells;
- drainage openings and wells;
- open unwatering from the openings;
- combined facilities.
At the uncovering of two or more water-bearing stratums by the opening the combined
dewatering systems should be applied. In this case the main dewatering should be executed by
wells with immersible pumps, and the remaining water should be removed by the light
wellpoint systems or open unwatering.
6.7.1.5. The unwatering wells equipped with pumps should be applied in the water-bearing
layer with the filtration factor no less than 0,5 m/day at the sufficient layer of the drainage
ground between the structure trough and underlying waterproof layer.
To increase effectiveness of dewatering the wells should be equipped with the vacuum
dewatering facilities.
In case of low thickness of the waterproof layer under the opening trough, and bedding of
artesian aquifer under it the unwatering wells should be applied for relieving of the head.
6.7.1.6. The light well point systems should be applied in the grounds with the filtering
factor within 0,2 and 50,0 m/day in case of necessity of dewatering at the depth no more than
5 m from the ground surface or from the structure trough. At the development of pits with
slopes the step-by-step lowering of the ground waters level should be conducted. The well
points at the each tier should be connected to the separate system.
6.7.1.7. The ejection units should be applied generally for the vacuum unwatering in the
grounds with the filtering factors within 0,2 and 5,0 m/day.
6.7.1.8. The absorbing wells should be applied for drainage of water from the overlying to
the underlying water-bearing stratum with more water permeability.
6.7.1.9. The drainage openings and wells should be used, as a rule, in the rocky and halfrocky water-bearing grounds. The wells should be arranged generally from the openings for
drying of water-bearing formations with low water inflow.
6.7.1.10. The WEP on the dewatering should be developed by the organization executing
these works.
The WEP should contain the information about the necessary lowering of the ground
waters level, as well as the following data:
- for unwatering wells of all types:
а) wells drilling method and technology with indication of type and diameter of the drill
bit, and list of necessary equipment;
b) type of the filter and amount of the sand-and-gravel cushioning layer with indication of
composition of fractures;
c) method of hole washing, connection layout and pumping equipment type;
- for the light well point systems:
а) method of installation of well points;
b) arrangement of the cushioning layer, number of the well points, connection layout and
pumping equipment type;
- for the ejection units:
а) technology of arrangement of wells under the installation of external pipes of the well
points;
b) mounting of the ejection unit, its type and dimensions;
c) requirements to the ejection unit;
d) connection layout with indication of the volume of circulation tanks, pumping
equipment type, diameters of the suction and discharge pipelines.
6.7.1.11. At the elaboration of WEP the possible changes in the pumping equipment types
should be correlated with the project organization. The unwatering system should be provided
Page 156 of 295

with redundant equipment.
6.7.1.12. In the difficult hydro-geological conditions the mode of dewatering should be
corrected in the laboratory conditions using the simulation technique or experimental-andproduction works executed at the stage of elaboration of the working documentation.
6.7.1.13. The following should be controlled:
- well drilling mode;
- sampling and description of grounds at the well drilling;
- process of equipment of wells with filters;
- structure of the cushioning layer;
- hole washing;
- installation of the well points.
The acts according to the Appendices 6.7.А1 and 6.7.А2 should be compiled regarding the
equipment of wells with filters and their washing.
Before the beginning of works on dewatering the observation holes should be drilled. At
the drying of several stratums the observation holes should be installed for the each stratum.
6.7.1.14. Works on dewatering should be conducted in three stages.
1st stage – putting the system into operation.
At the putting the system into operation the following should be represented:
- real geological opencast by the each well with indication of the type of drilling rig,
structure of well, type and intervals of installation of the filter and pump;
- plan of disposition of unwatering facilities, real longitudinal cross-section with indication
of installed wells, well points, observation holes, and real static level of water in the stratum.
The commissioning of installations should be executed by committee and approved by act
according to the Appendix 6.7.A3.
2nd stage – system operation.
After the meeting the project requirements the act of the site readiness for execution of
basic works according to the Appendix 6.7.А4 should be compiled.
3rd stage – completion of the system operation.
Decision about the completion of works on dewatering should be taken by the committee
and approved by act according to the Appendix 6.7.А5 with indication about the further
utilization of wells or their liquidation in correspondence with the RD (Regulatory
Documents) 07-225 and project.
6.7.2. Artificial freezing of grounds
6.7.2.1. The artificial freezing of grounds should be applied for protection of openings
from the water inflows or ground masses where utilization of other methods is ineffective.
Freezing of grounds should be executed either with application of cooling agent,
circulating in the closed system – cooling station – freezing columns, or at the direct
evaporation of the cooling agent – liquid nitrogen or solidified carbon dioxide in the freezing
columns.
Development of the technology of the ground freezing with liquid nitrogen should be
executed by the project organization having the experience of work with low-temperature
cooling agents.
The vessels and instruments of the freezing stations operating under the pressure should be
commissioned according to the PB 03-576.
6.7.2.2. Before the works start it is necessary to inspect the buildings, structures, and
underground communications located in the affected area of the frozen grounds. To control
their probable deformations the installation of observation stations should be provided.
6.7.2.3. Putting the freezing system into operation should be approved by act according to
the Appendix 6.7.B1. The works in the frozen grounds area should be started only after the
formation of ice-and-ground barrier of the design thickness and temperature. Permission for
the execution of the tunneling works in the frozen grounds area should be approved by act
Page 157 of 295

according to the Appendix 6.7.B2.
6.7.2.4. Construction of the shaft sections and escalator tunnels in the unstable watered
grounds should be executed under the protection of the ring ice-and-ground barrier. In this
case the freezing columns should be embedded in the waterproof layer.
In case of unavailability of the waterproof layer or its insufficient thickness the solid or
zonal freezing of the ground mass should be applied.
6.7.2.5. At the shaft driving under the protection of the ring ice-and-ground barrier during
the each run the ground should first be developed within the unfrozen core to the depth
indicated in the WEP, and then the frozen ground should be developed.
In case of considerable water inflow in the heading indicating the discontinuity of the iceand-ground barrier the works should be stopped, the shaft should be flooded to the static level
of the ground waters, and additional freezing of the grounds should be conducted.
6.7.2.6. It is recommended to accept the following distance between the freezing wells, m,
no more:
- at the contour freezing:
а) for shafts - 1,2;
b) for escalator and main line tunnels - 1,1;
- at the freezing of open pits with location of wells in two lines:
а) internal line - 1,25;
b) external line - 1,5;
c) between the lines - 3,0;
- at the freezing of solid mass:
а) by the contour - 1,5;
b) inside the contour - 3,0.
6.7.2.7. During the process of the freezing wells drilling works the real temperature and
rate of the ground waters flow, as well as their salinity should be defined.
During the drilling process for the each tenth well by the ice-and-ground barrier contour
the real depth of the waterproof layer should be defined. In case of discrepancy between the
real and design data the project documentation should be corrected.
At the displacement of the well from the design position additional wells should be drilled
and included in the freezing process.
The number of additional vertical wells at the depth of freezing up to 100 m can be no
more than 10 %, inclined - 20 %, at the depth of freezing more than 100 m - 20 and 25 %,
correspondingly.
The depth of wells at the drilling should no less than 1m exceed the length of the freezing
column.
Before the beginning of the design period of active freezing of the grounds no less than 5
days should be provided for leading of the freezing station to the design mode.
6.7.2.8. The control of the execution and acceptance of works on the artificial freezing of
grounds should be conducted according to the Table 6.7.1.
T a b l e 6.7.1
Technical requirements

Maximal deviations

Linear displacements from the design
direction of the well:
vertical;
No more than 1 % of the depth
inclined
No more than 2 % of the length
Displacements from position of wells 5 cm
in plane
Hermiticity of the cooling system:
Pressure at the hydraulic testing if the No less than 2,5 МPа
joint of each extended pipe and shoe of
the freezing column;

Control (method and
scope)

measurement, in every
10 m
measurement, each
well
The same, with
logging

Page 158 of 295

Control (method and
scope)
Level of liquid poured to the column Change of the liquid level no more than by 3 mm
The same
per three days
Temperature of the cooling agent at Temperature should not more than 2 °С differ
continuous
the column output in the stable from the temperature of the cooling agent in the
operating mode
distributor per each 100m of the depth of
freezing
Achievement of the design thickness Availability of negative temperature in all
continuous
and continuity of the ice-and-ground thermometric columns located within the iceEach column
barrier
and-ground barrier
Rise of the water level in the observation holes in Water level registering
the closed contour
Stability of the cooling agent temperature
periodical
Indication
of
the
crosswell
acoustic
measurements
Technical requirements

Maximal deviations

6.7.2.9. For the pits where the frozen ground is used as the temporary enclosing structure
keeping of the grounds in frozen conditions should be executed in the active mode during the
whole period of the construction works.
6.7.2.10. Application of the drill and blast method of works in the area of the ice-andground barrier is allowed on the base of specially developed WEP taking the measures against
the barrier stability failure and on the intactness of the freezing columns.
6.7.2.11. In case the freezing columns get in the area of the opening section they should be
disconnected from the system, the cooling agent should be removed from them, and they
should be plugged. The remaining parts of columns should be connected to the freezing
system again.
6.7.2.12. Decisions regarding the readiness of the site for execution of basic works and
regarding the stop of works on the artificial freezing of grounds should be approved by acts
according to the Appendices 6.7.B2 and 6.7.B3.
6.7.2.10. In case of substantiation it is allowed to combine the works on artificial melting
of the frozen grounds with other construction-and-mounting works.
6.7.3. Injection grouting
6.7.3.1. The injection grouting at the construction of the underground structures should be
applied for driving the sections of loose water-saturated and disturbed rocky grounds,
arrangement of the pits fencing, protective screens (curtains), strengthening of foundations of
buildings and other structures located in the affecting area of the construction, as well as for
liquidation of emergency situations occurring during the construction process.
6.7.3.2. The methods of grouting by the type of applied injection materials can be divided
to the cementation, silicatization, and tarring, by the method of injection of the solution into
the ground – to the ordinary injection and jet grouting.
6.7.3.3. The method of grouting should be selected on the base of engineering-andgeological and hydro-geological researches, ecological requirements, and technical-andeconomical comparison of the grouting variants.
Depending on the engineering-and-geological conditions, purpose, and accepted method of
injection the injection solutions on the base of mineral binding or polymeric materials having
the wide range of rheological and physical-and-mechanical characterictics and providing the
increase of hardness and anti-filtration density of grounds, or the water suppression should be
applied for the ground treatment.
The areas of application of different methods are represented in the Table 6.7.2.
T a b l e 6.7.2
Method of
grouting
Cementation

Characteristics of the ground
Recommended type and kind of the injection
Filtration factor,
solution
Grounds type (kind)
m/day
Rocky fractured, weathered
20 - 100
Cement
Different kinds of cement,
Page 159 of 295

Method of
grouting

Characteristics of the ground
Filtration factor,
Grounds type (kind)
m/day
and carstified coarsely
clastic, coarse- and
medium-grained sands

Rocky, low fractured, nonrocky grounds including the
fine-grained and
pulverescent sands, clay
sands
Jet cementation Loosed grounds, from
coarse-grained to cohesive
grounds
Silicatization

Resining

Rocky fractured, coarsegrained, sands, loesses
Rocky, low fractured,
medium- and fine-grained
and pulverescent sands,
loesses
Rocky,
low
fractured,
medium- and fine-grained
and pulverescent sands,
clay sands

От 0,3 - 5

Recommended type and kind of the injection
solution
with inert and chemical
additives of different
designation, aerated
solutions on the vibration
milled cements
Slurry
Cement, clay, additives of
different designation
Extra finely
Different marks of the
dispersed adhesive “Microdur” with
“Microdur”
plastificator and accelerator
of curing

Non
reglamented

Cement for
cementation

5 - 80

Bi-solution
Silicatization
Mono-solution
Silicatization

0,5 - 20

От 0,3 - 5

Resin solutions

jet Cement, cement-andbentonite with sodium
silicate and chemical
additives
Sodium silicate, calcium
chloride
Soft and hard sodium silica
gels with hardeners – acid
and metal oxide solutions
Carbamide and other kinds
of resins

6.7.3.4. To select the method of grouting and obtaining of the initial data for designing of
injection works in addition to the main engineering-and-geological researches the special
researches and investigations should be conducted.
At the 1st stage the detailed data regarding the geological structure of the grounds, hydrogeological conditions of the section, and physical-and-mechanical characteristics of the
grounds on the base of researches executed according the clause 4.1 or fulfilled additionally
for updating of the engineering-and-geological conditions applicably to the specifics of
conduction of the injection works should be obtained.
At the 2nd stage the laboratory researches and experimental works on grouting in the
natural conditions providing the selection of initial materials for preparation of the solution,
definition of its physical-and-mechanical and rheological characteristics should be executed.
After the stipulation of the kind and composition of the injection solution the experimental
injection of the ground at the construction site for checking and updating of parameters of the
injection grouting, and correction of the grouting technology should be conducted.
6.7.3.5. The experimental grouting, as a rule, should be conducted in the cases when the
grouting should be applied for the especially critical structures, or in the extra difficult
engineering-and-geological conditions, as well as in case of necessity of guaranteed
achievement of the design characteristics of the stabilized ground.
At the execution of experimental works the design volume and radius of grouting,
physical-and-mechanical characteristics of the stabilized grounds should be defined, the
technological approaches and parameters of injection (discharge pressure, consumption of the
injection materials), period of injection per the unit of the ground volume, and in case of jet
cementation the solution and air discharge pressure, speed of lifting and rotation of the
monitor, number and diameter of nozzles, consumption of the solution per 1m of the well
should be corrected.
If the experimental injection is not conducted no less than 10 % of the injection wells
should be accepted as experimental.
Page 160 of 295

By the results of conduction of the injection works the correction of the project
documentation by the injection grouting should be executed.
6.7.3.6. During the process of execution of works the technological parameters of the
injection works should be corrected depending on the changes in geological and hydrogeological characteristics of the grounds revealed during the process of execution of works.
6.7.3.7. The working documentation on the injection grouting should be elaborated by
specialized project organization. The documentation should contain the following technical
solutions and data:
- feasibility study of the selected grouting method;
- solution on the assignment of the type (kind) of the basement or other structure from the
stabilized grounds, and constructive scheme of the grouting in correspondence with the settled
technical problem;
- scale engineering-and-geological plans and cross-sections with inserted design outlines
and dimensions of the stabilizing ground masses, as well as requirements to the mechanical,
deformational, and other properties of the stabilized grounds;
- data regarding the volumes of the stabilizing ground masses, and total amount of the
materials necessary for execution of works;
- location of the injection and reference wells in the stabilized ground mass in plane and by
the depth with indication of their depths, slopes, diameters, allowable displacements;
- data regarding the assortment, characteristics, and number of the mechanisms and
equipment (drilling, packing, pumping, injection, compressing equipment, vessels, etc)
necessary for execution of the mechanisms operation;
- order of treatment of the grounds with injection solutions, their specific consumption,
discharge pressure, order of preparation of the injection solutions;
- technological maps and diagrams with description of the methods and technological
consequence of the conducted works, man-hours, and demand in the mechanisms and
materials by stages, speed of rotation and lifting of the monitor at the jet cementing of
grounds;
- scopes of works on the control grouting and instructions on their execution;
- additional instructions to the measures on the works quality control, safety measures,
environmental protection;
- calendar schedule of works where the consequence and periods of execution of their
separate kinds on the base of the scopes, technology and availability of mechanisms and
equipment should be stipulated;
- other data having the general construction nature (auxiliary facilities, activities necessary
in case of execution of works in winter conditions, etc).
6.7.3.8. The works on the injection grouting should be executed by the specialized
construction organization or by the sector experienced in the conduction of drilling and
injection works.
6.7.3.9. Organization of works on the grouting should provide:
- preparation of the construction site to the works, including the construction (where
appropriate) of the special chambers, openings at the tunneling in the unstable water-saturated
ground areas, fencing of the working sites, arrangement of the temporary domestic premises,
warehouses, tents, heating of the ready-mix stations;
- provision of the site with electric power, water, compressed air;
- geodetic marking of the tunnel axis and outline at the execution of works with the
daylight surface;
- delivery, disposition, connection, and testing of the technological equipment; delivery
and storage of the construction materials;
- organization of laboratory service.
6.7.3.10. The injection works should be obligatory documented with indication of time of
Page 161 of 295

beginning and completion of works, numbers of wells and boundaries of the sites of execution
of works, main technical specifications of the used equipment, composition of solutions, etc.
It is also necessary to register data regarding the regimes and consumptions of the solutions,
their characteristics, results of hydro-testing of the wells, deviations from the WEP
requirements and their reasons.
At the execution of the injection works the common works log-book should be kept, as
well as the log-books of drilling and hydro-testing of wells, discharge and control of
parameters of the injection solution and backfill stones.
6.7.3.11. In case of revelation of changes in the engineering-and-geological conditions,
necessity of alteration of the works execution methods, and in the other substantiated cases
the further works should be executed after the insertion of corresponding alterations and
amendments in the project documentation only.
6.7.3.12. The following requirements should be imposed on the injection solutions:
- high penetration ability;
- providing the maximal yield of the backfill stone;
- possibility of regulation of the technological (rheological) parameters (viscosity, period
of curing or solidification, etc);
- mechanical stability and anti-filtration density of the stabilized ground corresponding to
the purposes of injection.
The main types of the injection solutions and their short characteristics are represented in
the Table 6.7.3.
At the selection of the type and composition of the injection solution it is necessary to
consider:
- geological and hydro-geological conditions of the specific site;
- injection purpose (increase of the hardness, stability, or water-proofing of the grounds,
filling of the large cavities or fissures, preventing of the water inflow, etc);
- designation of the solution (injection, drilling, for arrangement of the casing, soil-cement
piles, etc);
- requirements to the physical-and-mechanical characteristics of the stabilized ground, and
to the technological parameters of the solution (density, viscosity, period of curing, etc);
- costs and ecological requirements to the materials used for preparation of solutions.
6.7.3.13. At the ordinary injection of the grounds to provide the high strength
characteristics of the grounds (> 1,0 МPа) the all kinds of solutions (suspensions) on the
cement base with additives, extra finely dispersed adhesive mineral “Microdur”, silicate (solid
gels) with organic and inorganic hardeners (including the bi-solution silicatization), as well as
the polymeric resin solutions should be used.
To increase the water-proofing (anti-filtration density), stability, and to provide the
hardness of the stabilized ground within 0,3 and 1,0 МPа the slurries of liquid consistencies
with the sodium silicate and bentonite clay, extra finely dispersed adhesive “Microdur”,
silicate solutions with inorganic hardeners (mono-solution silicatization), polymeric resin
solutions of low concentration should be used.
For the jet cementation of the grounds it is recommended to apply the suspensions of the
mineral adhesives (cement, bentonite clay, etc) of liquid consistencies.
To improve the properties of all kinds of solutions the different additives, regulating the
rheological features of the solutions (viscosity, period of curing or solidification) and
characteristics of the stabilized ground (hardness, water-proofing, etc) should be used.
6.7.3.14. The injection solutions (suspensions) on the base of mineral materials (cement,
clay, ash, etc, additives) should be used for filling of the cavities, large pores and fissures,
increase of the hardness and water-proofing of the coarse-pored loosed grounds with the
filtration factor of 50 m/day and more, as well as for fractured rocky grounds with fracture
opening value of 0,1 mm and more, and specific water absorption of 0,01 l/min⋅mm of the
Page 162 of 295

water column and more.
6.7.3.15. It is recommended to use the extra finely dispersed adhesive “Microdur” for
injection of porous grounds (including the pulverescent and fine-grained sands) with the
filtration factor of 0,3 m/day, and fine fractured rocky grounds with fracture opening value of
0,05 mm and more, as well as in the cases when the considerable increase of the hardness of
the used grounds is required, or application of the resin solutions is prohibited by the
ecological requirements.
6.7.3.16. The extra finely dispersed adhesive “Microdur” suspensions have the properties
of the ordinary cement suspensions and differ from them by the grain-size composition, that
provides their viscosity comparable with the viscosity of water and dispersion-free adhesives
(soluble in water polymeric resins). They can be applied in all ground conditions where
application of the cement and silicate and polymeric materials solutions is possible.
6.7.3.17. The silicate solutions should be used to increase the hardness and water-proofing
of porous grounds with the filtration factor from 0,5 to 80 m/day, and fine fractured rocky
grounds with the fracture opening value of 0,05 mm and more, as well as for initial or
secondary (after the injection of the cement-based solutions) treatment of grounds.
To provide the high strength characteristics of the ground (2,0 МPа and more) the bisolution silicatization, and mono-solution receipts with the hydrofluorosilicic acid hardener
should be used. The other silicate receipts provide the hardness of the stabilized ground within
0,3 - 1,0 МPа, and water impermeability of the ground, and can be applied as for treatment of
grounds before and after their cementing, as independently, according to the hydro-geological
characteristics of the grounds and requirements to the grouting.
6.7.3.18. The injection solutions on the base of polymeric resins (as a rule, carbamide
resins of the КМ marks, with the oxalic acid hardener) should be used for injection to the fine
fracture sand porous grounds with the filtration factor of 0,3 m/day, however, application of
the polymeric resins can be restricted by the ecological requirements.
6.7.3.19. In the cases when the treated grounds have increased content of carbonates or
organic particles (0,1 - 3,0 %), or it is necessary to decrease the filtering-off degree of the
liquid phase of suspensions on the base of mineral adhesives at the injection of fractured
porous grounds, it is recommended to conduct the preliminary treatment of the grounds with
lean acid solutions (hardeners to the resin solutions).
6.7.3.20. The scope of works on the injection grouting includes the drilling, wellhead
completion and location construction and well testing, preparation and injection of the
injection solution, retrieving of the drilling equipment (injectors, cup-type, etc), as well as the
works on the quality control of the grouting.
T a b l e 6.7.3
Characteristics of injection solutions

Characteristics of
stabilized ground

Type of injection
solutions

Density Weight or Curing Flowability,
water
Composition of
of
volume
period
cm
Hardness,
impermeability
solution
solution, ration of (beginning (viscosity,
МPа
Кf. cm/s
g/cm3 components - end), h
cP)
Stable and Cement
Different kinds of 1,2 - 2,0 W:C = 0,5 unstable
cement. Including
10
suspensions
the
vibration
milled, with inert
0,75 - 12
18 - 24
Up to 30
10-4
and
chemical
additives
of
different
designation
Cement-and- Cement,
clay, 1,5 - C:A = 1:1 clay
additives
of 1,65
1:4
То же
Up to 25
10-4 - 10-6
different
W:C = 0,5 - 4 - 24
designation
5
Page 163 of 295

Characteristics of injection solutions

Characteristics of
stabilized ground

Type of injection
solutions

Density Weight or Curing Flowability,
water
Composition of
of
volume
period
cm
Hardness,
impermeability
solution
solution, ration of (beginning (viscosity,
МPа
Кf. cm/s
g/cm3 components - end), h
cP)
Cement for Cement, cement- 1,5 - 1,6 W:C = 0,8 jet
bentonite,
with
1
cementing sodium
silicate
2-4
18 - 24
Up to 30
and
chemical
additives
Extra finely “Microdur” with 1,1 - 1,5 W:C = 6 - 1
dispersed
plastificator and
2,5 - 4,0
20 - 30
0,5 - 30
10-6 - 10-9
adhesive
accelerator
of
“Microdur” curing
Solutions Bi-solution Sodium silicate
1,35 1
of silicates Silicatization
1,44
0 - 0,01 (25 - 50) 1,5 - 3,5
10-4 - 10-6
and resins
Calcium chloride
1,26
1
Bi-solution Sodium silicate
1,04 1
Silicatization
1,19
(soft gels)
Hardeners:
Phosphoric acid
1,025
3-4
Sulphuric acid
1,06
0,87
0,5 - 16 (1,5 - 3,0)
2-4
Aluminium
1,06
0,47
sulphate
Sodium aluminate 1,05
2,0 - 0,35
Hydrofluorosilicic 1,037 0,01 - 0,02
acid
10-6 - 10-9
The
same Sodium silicate
1,3
1
(hard gels) Hydrofluorosilicic 1,08 0,5 - 1
(3 - 5)
20 - 40
0,2 - 0,3
acid
1,10
Resin
Carbamide resin 1,08 1
solutions
of the КМ mark
1,16
Hardeners:
0,07 - 4
(3 - 14)
До 30
Oxalic acid
1,03 - 0,03 - 0,15
1,04
Hydrochloric acid То же 0,04 - 0,10
N o t e - W:C – water to cement ratio; C:A – cement to additive ration.

6.7.3.21. The scope of works in the jet cementing of the grounds includes the drilling of the
pilot wells and lowering of the monitor into the well, it’s installation at the design depth,
preparation of the injection solution, lifting of the monitor with simultaneous supply of the
injection solution through the nozzles, wash-out of the cavities in the ground and their filling
with soil-cement material, retrieval of the working body and moving of the aggregate to the
next point.
6.7.3.22. All design wells before the drilling start should receive numbers indicating the
regular position of the wells at the field of operation regardless from the drilling and injection
periods.
All additional wells drilled during the injection works should receive the numbers of the
nearest design wells with addition of «п» symbol (repeated), «к» symbol (reference), etc.
6.7.3.23. Drilling and injection of the wells should be conducted, as a rule, from the
external outlines to the internal ones, from the lower to the upper wells, and by the method of
consecutive approximation of the wells – by stages. At such consequence the next separate
wells or groups of wells are reference relating to the previously used or formed at the jet
cementation soil-cement piles.
The real displacement of the wellheads from the design position should not exceed 0,1 m.
6.7.3.24. The exploration and injection wells at the sections with high water head should be
drilled through the preventer units in order to prevent the water breakthrough with
Page 164 of 295

uncontrolled removal of ground and provide the possibility of prompt injection of the solution
into the well for liquidation of removal.
6.7.3.25. Depending on the hydro-geological conditions of the section and accepted
technology of injection at the injection of solution the conductors (to provide the given
direction of wells, shoring and hermitization of wells), or packers (for hermitization of wells)
in case of treatment of the fractured grounds through the drilling rod or cap column, as well as
pill injectors or cap columns in case of treatment of the loosed grounds should be used.
The injection suspensions on the base of extra finely dispersed adhesive “Microdur”
should be injected into the grounds only through the cap columns.
6.7.3.26. It is recommended to execute the drilling of wells and injection of solutions by
the method of downward (the well is drilled at the depth of the first run, injected, then the
injected area is drilled-out, and the well is drilled at the length of the second run, etc) or
upward runs (the well is drilled-out to the whole depth, and treatment of the ground is
executed by the sequential runs, from the well bottom to the wellhead).
The depth of runs (length of treated wells) should not exceed 10 m. In the unstable
disturbed grounds at the crossing of sections with big water inflow their depth should be
decreased to 3 m.
6.7.3.27. The additional wells should be drilled in the case the areas with the solution loss
10 times exceeding the average loss for the given stage of wells, areas with inadequate
injection, or well sections that cannot be drilled to the design depth by the production
circumstances are revealed among the injected wells.
6.7.3.28. The equipment for execution of the injection works should be selected depending
on the method of grouting (injection, jet cementing), scope of works, type of the injection
solution, and technological flow-sheet of its preparation and injection.
The mixing and injection equipment should provide the proper mixing of the solution
components and required injection pressure, high work speed at the minimal labor and
material expenses, minimal blockage of the construction sites, convenient transportation,
mounting and demounting, and safety maintenance.
6.7.3.29. Materials during the process of preparation of the solutions by the mechanized
method should be dozed by mass. Water and water solutions of silicates, resins, and additives
should be dozed by volume. The accuracy of dozing for water and cement compiles up to 3
%, for the given component volumes of the silicate and resin-based solutions, as well as
additives – up to 5 %.
The each next component should be fed to the vessel of the mortar mill after obtaining of
homogeneous mixture of previously fed components in the full volume.
The additives for improvement of the solution properties should be prepared beforehand in
the kind of higher concentration solution, and injected into the tempering water in the amount
providing their working concentration in the injected solution.
6.7.3.30. The components of the cement-based solutions should be fed into the mortar mill
in the following order: water – bentonite clay - cement – sodium silicate. The prepared slurry
should be continuously mixed or moved up to the moment of its injection to the well, and
should be used during no more than four hours after its preparation.
6.7.3.31. Suspension of extra finely dispersed adhesive “Microdur” should be prepared in
the high-speed mortar mill with the blender rotary speed no less than 3000 rpm at the electric
motor power no less than 2 KW, or in the turbulence mixer with actuator and automated
dozing of the adhesive, water, and additives.
The order of the components feed into the mortar mill: water – super-plasticizer С-3 –
accelerator of curing – mineral adhesive extra finely
dispersed
adhesive
“Microdur”
(gradually and by batch).
6.7.3.32. At the mixing of components of the silicate and resin solutions in the mortar mill
the hardener should be added to the silicate and resin, При смешивании компонентов
Page 165 of 295

растворов силикатов и смол в растворомешалке отвердитель добавлять к силикату и
смоле, and not the reverse; the design time of the gel formation should be controlled by
means of solution sampling with registering of the moment of the gel formation.
6.7.3.33. The injection solution should be injected to the well directly after the hydraulic
testing.
6.7.3.34. Depending on the solution kind the injection should be executed by the singlecomponent scheme – using one pump, by the single solution supply conduit (the solution
components should be mixed in the mortar mill before the injection) or by the doublecomponent scheme - using two pumps, by two solution supply conduits (the solution
components should be mixed in the hydraulic blender at the wellhead).
6.7.3.35. Injection of the solution should be executed by the clamping method using the
pumps with variable-speed drive, or by semi-circulating method using the pumps with noncontrolled drive.
6.7.3.36. The normal injection is the mode where the solution injection is conducted
continuously, with gradual decrease of the solution supply; in this case the solution pressure
corresponds to the limit pressure, or gradually increases to the limit pressure, and all injected
solution gets into the ground.
The composition of injected solution should not change when at the continuous injection
the supply of the solution decreases with the constant pressure, or the solution pressure
increases at its constant supply.
Density of the solution should be increased if the pressure does not rise at the maximal
supply of solution, or the solution supply does not fall at the limit pressure.
6.7.3.37. In case the solution leaks out to the surface or to another well the place of leak
should be immediately plugged (oakum, wooden wedges and plugs, quick-setting mortar).
The thickening of solution, decrease of the injection pressure, etc, can also be effective.
In case it is impossible to stop the solution leakage during the injection process the well
should be left for settling to the period from several hours to 2 - 3 days.
6.7.3.38. Injection of solution at the jet cementing of the ground should be conducted using
the high-pressure triplex pumps (up to 60,0 МPа) by the armored injection hoses connected
with monitor (drilling rod).
The monitor should be lowered into the well with supply of water and air with low rate and
pressure. After installation of the monitor at the design depth the destruction of the ground
should be conducted at the fixed position of the monitor during 1 – 2 min (to the moment
when the pulp comes out of the well), and then solution and air rate and pressure should be
increased to the operating values, after that the monitor should be lifted.
The monitor should be lifted smoothly and continuously. The maximum allowable speed
of lifting should be stipulated by the results of experimental works.
6.7.3.39. The most effective treatment of the loose or low cohesive grounds is achieved at
the relatively large rates of the injection solution, and the cohesive ones (compacted, argilloarenaceous grounds, clays) – at the relatively high solution injection pressure.
6.7.3.40. The injection solution rate at the jet cementation of the ground should be
regulated by the removal of solution with the pulp from the well. The normal process of
cementation is accompanied by negligible removal of solution, at the excessive removal of
solution its supply should be decreased, and at the lack of removal - increased.
6.7.3.41. At the injection of the silicate and resin-based solutions the injection mode should
be selected depending on the gel formation period allowing executing of the injection of
necessary amount of solution taking into consideration the permeability of grounds, solution
viscosity, and allowable injection pressure.
6.7.3.42. The quality control and evaluation of completion of the injection works should be
conducted systematically in the following scope:
а) acceptance control of coming materials – inspection of their conformance to the
Page 166 of 295

standards, technical conditions, certificates, and other documents certifying the quality of
materials, checking of observance of requirements to their unloading and storage;
b) operative control of execution of works – checking of their correspondence to the
project, and correction of technological parameters of drilling and injection of solutions after
the updating the engineering-and-geological conditions;
c) control works on definition of results of the grouting by injection or jet cementing, and
on the evaluation of quality after the completion of design scope of works, as well as
acceptance control with compiling of the concealed works acceptance act.
6.7.3.43. The quality of injection grouting should be evaluated by the results in testing of
reference wells and samples of stabilized ground.
The type and scope of the control testing should be stipulated depending on the specific
conditions of the construction on the base of analysis of executive documentation in the
grounds injection.
6.7.3.44. The quality of the jet cementation of the grounds should be stipulated on:
- stability of walls and remaining debit of the reference wells;
- specific water absorption of the reference wells;
- sampling and testing of the stabilized ground cores;
- dynamical penetration or static load testing of the stabilized ground mass;
- geophysical investigations of solidity, homogeneity, and hardness of the stabilized
ground.
The injection works on the grouting should be considered to be completed and satisfactory
after the design volumes of the grouting, and required physical-and-mechanical characteristics
of the stabilized ground (hardness, water impermeability, water-proofing, etc) are provided.
6.7.3.45. The quality control and evaluation of completeness of works should be conducted
by the committee including the representatives of the construction organization, customer, and
project organization.
The following should be submitted to the committee:
- project documentation on the injection works, additions and alterations in them;
- executive drawings on the completed section of works, the work execution log-books
according to the Appendices 6.7.C1, 6.7.C2, 6.7.C3, 6.7.C4, as well as the acts according the
Appendices 6.7.C5 and 6.7.C6;
- results of definition of characteristics of the materials used for injection, data of the
injection solutions and stabilized ground testing;
- documentation on the control works.
By the results of consideration of the submitted documentation the committee compiles the
act of the site readiness to execution of the basic works according to the Appendix 6.7.А4.
6.8. Construction sites
6.8.1. Development of the general layout of the construction site should be executed taking
into consideration the most effective dislocation of permanent equipment and facilities,
minimal expenses on the arrangement of engineering communications, permanent and
temporary roads and approaches, saving of the existing buildings, underground
communications, green plantings, providing of normal living conditions of population in the
construction site area, observance of the fire safety and sanitary requirements.
6.8.2. At the preparation of territories under the construction site the following should be
provided:
- resettlement of inhabitants, transfer of organizations and enterprises from the construction
area;
- demolition, re-laying, or liquidation of the existing engineering networks and structures;
- arrangement of the bypass roads, or diversion of the traffics to other city roads taking into
consideration the unobstructed passage of the special designation transport vehicles to all
buildings situated in the adjacent to the construction city quarters, and pedestrian passage;
Page 167 of 295

- definition of the technical conditions of buildings and structures situated in the
construction site area, draw up of corresponding documents;
- Installation of the geodesic-and-surveying marks;
- stacking of the axes and contours of the erected buildings and structures.
6.8.3. The construction organization - general contractor should specify the planned-highaltitude position of the existing underground engineering structures together with
representatives of the operating organizations no later than 7 days before the beginning of
works on their re-arrangement, and obtain the directive regarding the measures providing
safety of these structures during the execution of construction and mounting works.
6.8.4. The construction organization - general contractor should appoint the person
responsible for execution of works at the construction site by order, and should submit to him
(her) the following documents:
- act of transfer of the construction site territory from the customer to the general contractor
organization;
- schedule of works executed by the general contractor and subcontractor construction
organizations, and protocol of delimiting of their responsibilities;
- works execution log-book on the development of the construction site, drawn up and
issued by the customer;
- log-book of the field supervision of the project organization.
6.8.5. The construction site territory should be fenced by close timbering according to the
approved general layout and GOST 23407. The fencing structure should be dismountable with
unified elements.
The appearance of the fencing and its painting should be agreed with municipal
administrative authorities. The wooden details of fencing should be covered with fire-proof
compositions.
At the acceptance of fencing its straightness and verticality should be checked.
At the fencing, as a rule, near the entrance to the construction site the following should be
installed:
- information board with the name of the object; address, time of the start and the end of
construction; name of the customer and general contractor construction organization;
surname, position, and telephone number of the responsible executor of works;
- board with the scheme of the motor transport traffic on the territory of the construction
site, and speed limitation sign;
- board with the plan of the object fire protection for the period of construction with
indication of entrances, buildings, structures, and passages, places of location of the water
sources, fire extinguishing facilities and communications.
6.8.6. The entrance to the construction site should be equipped with remote controlled
gates providing the passage of the transport vehicles with off-gauge load.
The separate entrances should be equipped for the people pass.
6.8.7. The construction site territory should be designed and equipped with the system of
collection and removal of the surface (storm and flood) waters to the municipal storm
sewerage.
6.8.8. The vegetable soil cut at the planning should be removed to the places of temporary
disposal or permanent burial. Suitability of the cut soil for the execution of recultivation
works should be stipulated according to the clause 5.18.
6.8.9. The temporary roads with hard surface should be laid before the beginning of works
on the erection of temporary buildings and structures. At the places of road crossing with
temporary engineering communications the encasements should be embedded.
6.8.10. At the exit from the construction site territory the washing of wheels with cleaning
facilities and re-circulating water supply system should be provided.
6.8.11. At the basic construction sites, as a rule, should be located:
Page 168 of 295

- shower combine with medical center, canteen, and rest room;
- office of the site and surveying manager;
- mechanical shop for routine maintenance of the units of machines and mechanisms and
manufacturing of non-uniform details;
- pneumatic shop for preventive maintenance of instrumentation;
- blacksmith and drill maker shop;
- compressor station (in case of lack of centralizing compressed air supply);
- reinforcement bars shop;
- complete transformer substation;
- warehouse premises and site for storage of equipment and materials.
The composition of the temporary buildings and structures at the intermediate sites should
be stipulated on the base of the site designation.
6.8.12. The construction sites should be equipped with engineering communications,
power supply systems, radio transmission, security and fire alarm, mobile communication
facilities, and internal and external telephone communication lines with true output to the city
АТS (Automated Telephone Station).
Application of the loud-speaking communication is not recommended at the location of the
site near the existing inhabitant area.
6.8.13. Arrangement of the lightning protection of buildings and structures should be
executed according to the SO (Specification of Equipment) 153-34.21.122; earthing of
electrical installations, metal structures, vans, and other structures at the construction site –
according to the PB 03-428 and PUE.
6.8.14. The color decoration of the temporary buildings and structures should be executed
in correspondence with the architectural-and-composition solutions agreed with the regional
architectural-and-planning organization.
It is allowed to place the commercial advertisement, information boards, artworks, etc on
the buildings and fencing of the construction site providing that the advertisement is
registered in the established order.
6.8.15. It is allowed to locate the administrative premises, premises for sanitary-andhygienic and domestic service of the personnel, and premises for provision of technological
demands of the construction in the existing city buildings and structures in case of agreement
with the administrative, sanitary and fire supervision authorities.
6.8.16. The measures on provision of fire safety, location of the primary firefighting
facilities and fire alarm system should be taken according to the COP, PB 03-428, as well as
PPB 01 and NPB 104.
6.8.17. Storage of the construction materials and structures should be executed according
to the SNiP 12-03, PB 03-428 and TU on materials and structures.
Warehouses for storage of material-and-technical resources should be created with
observance of the storage areas and production resources standards.
6.8.18. The hoisting cranes and technological equipment should be installed at the flattened
sites with hard surface according to the certificates, instructions on the operation of
corresponding equipment, and PB 10-382.
6.8.19. The dangerous areas at the operation of mechanisms and equipment should be
fenced and marked with caution signs and signals well visible in the dark time of day.
Placement of the equipment, materials, goods, and presence of people in the dangerous areas
is not allowed.
It is recommended to arrange on the territory of construction sites the pedestrian ways with
the width no less than 1 m for passage without cargo, and 2 m for passage with cargo, and to
break them with minimal number of crossings with transport vehicles passages and undercrane ways.
The passages through the pits and trenches should be equipped with pedestrian bridges
Page 169 of 295

having the width no less than 1 m with 2-side handrails according to the GOST 12.4.059. The
passages with the slope more than 20° should be equipped with the duckboards having the
width no less than 0,6 m with stairs and one-side handrails.
The passages of people in the dark time of day should be equipped with lighting without
the blinding effect.
6.8.20. It is recommended to use for technological needs the treated mine waters according
to TU (Technical Conditions) on the specific production processes.
6.8.21. It is advisable to organize the preparation of the concrete mixture at the regional
concrete production plant closest to the constructed line. It is allowed to deliver the concrete
mixture in the transport mixer.
6.8.22. Leaving of the construction site and development of its territory should be
conducted with completion of the CMW. The territory developed according to the project
should be commissioned by the municipal administrative-and-technical inspection with
participation of the road services, management of the passenger transport, State Traffic Safety
Inspectorate (STSI), owners of the external engineering communications and structures.
Herewith the repeated technical examination of the buildings and structures stipulated by the
project with participation of the interested organizations and corresponding registering of the
results is obligatory.
The reinforced concrete structures and materials not used during the construction should be
utilized; burial of the construction wastes is not allowed.
6.9. Superstructure and contact rail
6.9.1. The track laying works in the tunnels should be started after the execution of works
according to the clause 6.16 of the SNiP 32-02, installation and concreting of the line control
survey point, arrangement and commissioning of the concrete foundation under the track
mounting.
It is recommended to execute the track laying works according to the Instruction [1].
6.9.2. The working teams executing the track laying works should be obligatory equipped
with technological labor-saving devices for the arrangement of the superstructure and
concreting of the permanent tracks.
6.9.3. Delivery of instruments and materials to the tunnel should be executed according to
the WEP using the shafts, material wells and rail descents; and to the place of track laying –
using the locomotive or railmotor car traction by the tracks with narrow and standard rail
gage.
6.9.4. the mounted, realigned, and released track should be accepted by the act by the
surveyors of the general contractor organization under the laying of the track concrete.
6.9.5. The concrete base of the track after the assembling of the water gutter formworks
and anticreeping devices of the pits should be cleaned and washed by the water stream under
the pressure; the rail joints, fastening blocks, and spacing jack bars should be protected from
the contamination.
6.9.6. The track concreting should be executed by sections with the length no less than 25
m with thorough compacting of the laid concrete mixture by vibrators.
At the mechanization of the concrete works using the larry cars and concrete pumps it is
advisably to apply the rail concrete mixing station for preparation of the concrete mixture
directly at the site of concreting.
The spacing jacks, water gutter formwork, and anticreeping devices pits should be
removed after the track concrete reaches no less than 50 % of the design hardness.
The cavities revealed under the cross-ties and short cross-ties should be filled with the
combo with the cement to sand ratio 1:2 with its injection by the hand pump through the holes
drilled in the concrete.
The rolling stock traffic on the concreted track is allowed for the transport units having the
weight up to 0,5 tons when the concrete reaches 30 % of the design hardness, and for the ones
Page 170 of 295

having the weight more than 0,5 tons - 70 % of the design hardness.
6.9.7. The track laying works at the above-ground sections should be executed after:
- completion of works on the drainage facilities and laying of all underground
communications;
- preparation of the road bed and its commissioning under the track mounting;
- installation of the line control survey points.
The arrangement of the road bed and superstructure should be executed according to the
SNiP 32-01.
6.9.8. The tracks with the reinforced concrete cross-ties at the above-ground sections
including the parking tracks of the electric depot should be laid on the prepared road bed by
the 25 m links; the materials should be delivered to the head of laying using the railmotor car
traction at the platforms with crane by the laid and realigned track sections.
The parking tracks laying should be conducted simultaneously with laying of the track
switches beginning from the rail joints next to the frogs, or from the joints of the frame rails.
The tracks in the buildings of the electric depot should be laid on the prepared structures of
the inspection pits in the direction from the joint of the parking tracks.
6.9.9. Installation of the contact rail should be executed by welded rail strings according to
the clause 6.17 of the SNiP 32-02.
6.9.10. Before the putting of the track into operation the track and contact rails, fastenings,
hangers, and protection boxes should be cleaned from the dust and dirt, the hangers and
insulator brackets should be coated with asphalt varnish.
6.10. Mounting of equipment
6.10.1. Preparation to execution of works
6.10.1.1. The WEP on the transportation and mounting of the equipment should be
developed, as a rule, by the mounting organization and correspond to the SNiP 3.01.01.
6.10.1.2 The mounting and using of the hoisting machines and mechanisms, load grippers,
fixtures and packing should correspond to the PB 10-382.
6.10.1.3. The equipment, goods, and materials in complete with the technical
documentation of the enterprises-manufacturers should be delivered for mounting in the
established by the WEP order and periods.
The heavy and large-size equipment should be delivered directly to the mounting area. At
the delivery of equipment to the mounting place in the package the latter should be opened
with participation of the customer and contractor.
6.10.1.4. After the conducting of revisions or repair of the equipment its correspondence to
the technical and design documentation should be defined by the committee with participation
of representatives of the customer, contractor, and executor of the revision or repair.
The revision of the large-size equipment should be conducted at the place of mounting.
Removal of defects emerged by the reason of violation of the storage, delivery regulations, or
exceeding of the expiry dates should be executed by the guilty party.
6.10.1.5. The organization accepted the equipment and materials is responsible for their
saving. Storage of the equipment and materials should be executed in correspondence with the
technical documentation of the manufacturer.
6.10.1.6. It is advisably to execute the delivery of the large-size equipment to the place of
mounting at the line sections constructed by the closed method preferably after the permanent
track laying; for delivery of the cable goods, pipes, and other long length materials the special
wells should be used. At the sections constructed by the cut-and-cover method the openings in
the structure floorings and walls should be left for these purposes.
Transportation of the equipment by the operating line tracks should be executed in
correspondence with indications of the Underground Railroad administration.
6.10.1.7. The structures commissioning under the mounting of the equipment and
communications should be equipped with temporary lighting, ventilation, water supply and
Page 171 of 295

electric power supply.
By the beginning of the mounting works it is necessary:
- to execute the construction works in the full volume;
- to lay the concealed communications, to make the mounting openings and holes with
diameter more than 30mm in the walls and floorings, and to put the sleeves. Dimensions of
the openings not indicated in the project documentation should be accepted according to the
Appendix 6.10А;
- to reinforce temporary, where appropriate, the construction structures, to prepare and pass
the under-crane ways, monorails, other structures and embedded items;
- to erect the fencings of openings, coverings of gutters and hatches;
- to render the walls and niches in the premises at the places in installation of the
equipment, sanitary and heating devices and communications, to arrange the underlayments
under the floorings, to install the locks in the doors;
- to execute the decoration works in the premises commissioning under the mounting of the
electrical equipment, automation and communication facilities (painting of the premises with
the lime white is not allowed), to install the means of protection from the direct sun rays at the
windows (jalousie, sun blinds), to create the THR (temperature and humidity regime) with the
air temperature no less than 10 °С and relative humidity no more than 65 %;
- in the premises designated for the mounting of the computers to provide the air
conditioning and regular thorough removing of the dust;
- to execute the preliminary aggregation of the equipment into the mounting blocks.
6.10.1.8. The construction objects should be submitted to the commissioning for mounting
of equipment in the whole or partially in the following composition:
- part of the station including the structures located at the level of platform;
- escalator tunnel with the tension chamber, machine room, corresponding production and
service premises;
- vestibule with passenger crossing and staircases. The partial commissioning of the
premises is allowed: the premises at the level of the ticket hall; the premises at the level of
platform and intermediate floor; pedestrian crossing; staircases with the under-stair premises.
In this case the production premises should be submitted for the commissioning first;
- main line tunnel section from the station to the current distributing point including the
integration with the near-tunnel structures;
- separate underground or above-ground structure;
- separate bays of the storage-and-repair building (SRB), motorcar depot, etc.
6.10.1.9. The readiness of the construction part of the structures to the beginning of the
mounting works should be approved by the committee acceptance. At the acceptance of the
premises the correspondence of the executed works to the project documentation and
technical documentation of the equipment manufacturer should be checked.
6.10.1.10. Before the mounting of the escalators control survey points it is necessary to
mark:
- level of the lower entrance site;
- level of the upper entrance site;
- lower vertical base;
- upper vertical base;
- escalator tunnel axis;
- places for installation of the string-axes of the escalators.
The places of installation of the control survey points should be selected taking into
consideration their use at the all stages of mounting and during the operation period. At the
installation of the control survey points the allowable deviations from the construction
assignment data should be accepted according to the clause 6.3.
6.10.2. Mounting works
Page 172 of 295

6.10.2.1. The mounting works should be conducted on the base of the following regulatory
documents:
а) in the electrotechnical facilities - SNiP 3.05.06, GOST 10434 and PUE;
б) in the automation systems - SNiP 3.05.07;
в) in the train traffic control facilities - PR 32 ЦШ (Digital Scale) 10.02 and PR 32 ЦШ
10.01;
г) in the communication facilities – OSTN (Industrial Construction-and-Technical
Standards) - 600;
д) in the protective earthing facilities - PUE;
е) in the sanitary-and-technical installations - SNiP 3.05.01, SNiP 3.05.05;
ж) escalators - PB 10-77;
и) high-pressure vessels - PB 03-576.
6.10.2.2. At the execution of mounting works the standard sets of special tools,
mechanisms, and fixtures by the kinds of works should be used.
6.10.2.3. At the execution of mounting works, testing of equipment, registering of the work
results it is necessary to follow the information and document forms represented in the
appendices.
6.10.2.4. The factory-made goods having the higher mounting readiness should preferably
be applied as the bearing structures.
6.10.2.5. The parts of escalators containing rubber in the cases of their storage at the
negative temperature before the mounting should be left to the moment when their
temperature will be equal to the temperature of air in the escalator premises, but no less than 5
°С.
At the installation of the rough pads under the escalator structures application of more than
three pads in one set and cut of the part of pad to compensate the non-parallelism of the
bearing surfaces is not allowed.
Before the mounting of the staircases the adjustment of the mechanical part of the
emergency and working brakes should be executed.
At the mounting of the staircases it is allowed to apply the remote control console.
6.10.2.6. At the installation of equipment the final tightening of the nuts of anchor screws
should be executed after the socket grout material reaches no less than 70 % of the design
hardness. The bearing surface of the equipment should be tightly born against the basement.
6.10.2.7. The passages of the wiring through the bearing structures and floorings should be
executed in the steel pipes, and passages through the partitions – in the penetrations, ducts,
pipes.
6.10.2.8. The pipes for the wiring should correspond to the conditions of laying,
mechanical and corrosion resistance of the premises environment.
6.10.2.9. The distance between the points of fastening of separate cables or wires at the
open laying directly on the construction structures or in the steel bus should be no more than
0,3 m; the distance between the bus fastening points – no more than 2 m.
It is allowed to execute the fastening of the bus to the construction structures of the
facilities, except for the main line tunnels, using the fastening gun.
6.10.2.10. The earthing conductors should be protected from the corrosion, mechanical
damage, and should be accessible for inspection. In case of use of the steel pipes as the
earthing conductors it is necessary to observe the integrity of circuit at the places of their
connection.
6.10.3. Individual testing of equipment
6.10.3.1. The scope of individual testing of the equipment of electrical installations should
correspond to the requirements in the documentation issued by the manufacturers.
The scope of testing includes:
- checking of correspondence of the installed equipment to the project documentation and
Page 173 of 295

regulatory requirements;
- preparation to the activation of the mechanical and electrical equipment;
- testing of the operation of the installation at idle speed element-by-element, at the local
control with power supply by the temporary or permanent circuit;
- testing of the equipment at idle speed and under the load.
6.10.3.2. Before the individual testing at the electrical installation the mode according to
the POT (Labor Protection Rules) RM-016 /RD 153-34.0-03.150 should be installed.
6.10.3.3. In case of revelation of defects during the process of individual testing of the
equipment and pipelines the testing should be repeated after the removal of defect.
It is not allowed to remove the defects in the vessels, apparatus, and pipelines under the
pressure, and in mechanisms and machines during their operation.
6.10.3.4. The individual testing of escalators should be conducted in three stages.
1st stage – testing of drive. It should be conducted after the mounting of the Е zone, locking
devices, and adjustment of the electrical equipment. The devices of the control circuit,
working brake, locking devices, main and reserve drive should be tested.
2nd stage – testing of drive with staircase. It should be conducted after the mounting of
staircase. The escalator activates by the reserve drive «upward» and «downward» up to full
revolution of the staircase.
3rd stage – testing of operating of escalator by the main drive for 1 h in the each direction
after the completion of all mounting works.
6.10.3.5. The testing of the sanitary-and-technical systems should be executed according to
the SNiP 3.05.01.
Testing of systems with application of the plastic pipelines should be conducted according
to the SP 40-102.
The testing should be conducted before the beginning of decoration works. The pressure
gauges applied for testing should be tested according to the GOST 8.002.
6.10.3.6. The systems of internal hot and cold water supply should be tested by the
hydrostatic or manometric method before the installation of draw-off fittings.
At the hydrostatic method of the systems testing the value of the testing pressure should be
equal to 1,5 of the excessive working pressure. The systems are considered as passed the
testing if during 10 minutes at the hydrostatic method of testing the drop of pressure does not
exceed 0,05 МPа, and there are no condensate in the welded joints, pipes, threaded
connections, and fitting, as well as the water leakage through the flushing facilities. After the
completion of testing the water should be discharged from the system.
The manometric testing of systems should be conducted in the following consequence:
- fill the system with air under the pressure of 0,15 МPа;
- In case of aurally revelation of air leakage decrease the pressure to atmospheric value and
eliminate the defects; then fill the system with air under the pressure of 0,1 МPа and hold it
under the testing pressure for 5 min. The system should be considered as passed the testing if
the pressure drop does not exceed 0,01 МPа.
6.10.3.7. Testing of the water heating systems should be conducted at deactivated
expansion vessels by the hydrostatic method under the pressure equal to 1,5 of the working
pressure but no less than 0,2 МPа in the lower point of the system. The system is considered
as passed the testing if during 5 minutes the drop of pressure does not exceed 0,02 МPа, and
there are no leakage in the system elements.
6.10.3.8. The steam heating systems with the working pressure up to 0,07 МPа should be
tested by the hydrostatic method under the pressure of 0,25 МPа in the lower point of the
system; the systems with the working pressure more than 0,07 МPа – by the hydrostatic
method under the pressure equal to the working pressure plus 0,1 МPа, but no less than 0,3
МPа in the upper point of the system. The system is considered as passed the testing if during
5 minutes the drop of pressure does not exceed 0,02 МPа, and there are no leakage in the
Page 174 of 295

system elements.
6.10.3.9. The steam heating systems after the hydrostatic or manometric testing should be
checked by steam under the working pressure of the system. The steam leakage is not allowed
here.
6.10.3.10. The heat run of the heating systems should be conducted for 7 h with checking
of the warming-up uniformity of the heating devices by feel.
6.10.3.11. The internal sewerage systems should be tested by the water pass method with
the simultaneous opening of 75 % of sanitary devices connected to the testing section during
the time period necessary for its inspection. The system is considered as passed the testing if
during its inspection there is no leakage in the places of the pipeline joints.
6.10.3.12. The internal drainage systems should be tested by filling with water up to the
level of the upper rainwater head. Duration of the testing should be no less than 10 min. The
drainage systems are considered as passed the testing if during their inspection there is no
leakage, and the level of water in the stand pipes does not fall.
6.10.3.13. The pressure networks of sewerage and unwatering made from the steel pipes
with cast iron fittings should be tested under the hydrostatic pressure equal to 1,25 of the
working pressure, but no less than 0,5 МPа. Duration of the testing should be no less than 10
min during which the pressure should not drop more than by 0,05 МPа.
6.10.3.14. The ventilation and air conditioning systems should be tested after the
completion of the general construction and decoration works in the premises of the ventilation
installations, and conducting of individual testing of the power supply, heating systems, etc.
The pressure air-ducts of the exhaust ventilation system of the accumulator premises (in
case of installation of open acid batteries in them) should be tested under the pressure twofold
exceeding the working pressure. At the testing for 1h no more than 10 % pressure drop is
allowed.
Testing of ventilators of the tunnel ventilation system should be conducted in
correspondence with the instructions issued by the manufacturers.
6.10.3.15. The insulation of the more than 1KV voltage electrical equipment should be
tested by the increased DC voltage according to the RD 34.45-51.300.
6.10.3.16. The insulation of the electrical equipment of the voltage within 60V and 1KV
including, and secondary commutation circuits should be tested by means of measuring of its
resistance with 2,5KV megohmmeter. The insulation resistance should be no less than 0,5
МОhм.
The insulation of the foreign electrical equipment having the electric strength below the
standard in case of lack of instructions of the vendor should be tested under the voltageм
equal to 90 % of the factory testing voltage.
The testing of grounding facilities of the electrical installations should be conducted
according to the PUE.
6.10.3.17. The strength of the structures for suspension of lamps in case of lack of
instructions in the project documentation should be tested for 10 min under the static load
equal to:
а) for the lamps with the weight up to 100 kgf – fivefold relating to the lamp weight;
б) for the lamps with the weight more than 100 kgf - twofold relating to the lamp weight
plus 80 kgf.
The structure is considered as passed the testing at the absence of visible deformations.
6.10.3.18. The necessity and testing method of the cable structures located in the main line
tunnels should be defined in the project documentation. Installation of the cable structures laid
by the tunnel vault and by the openings’ bypasses should be tested with participation of
representatives of the field supervision, general contractor, mounting and operating
organizations. The testing results confirming their correspondence to the project
documentation and proper quality of fastenings should be approved by act.
Page 175 of 295

6.10.3.19. The individual testing of the automation and communication systems should be
conducted separately for the each system without load, under the load, and with correction of
the system adjustment parameters during the process of the individual testing of equipment.
6.10.3.20. The cable lines of communication systems should be tested by means of
measurement of:
- insulation resistance;
- ohmic resistance of the loop;
- ohmic unbalance of conductors;
- coupling attenuation at the near end;
- coupling attenuation at the far end;
- input resistance;
- working attenuation.
Paired cables should be tested by means of conduction of complex of DC measurements
before and after their connection to the permanent devices, sensing and measuring of the
coupling attenuations.
6.10.3.21. The fiber-optic lines of the communication system should be tested by
measurement of:
- attenuation in the optic fiber of the cable;
- optic radiation power degree at the optic fiber of fiber-optic terminal device output;
- error rate in the digital line path at the outputs of terminal and intermediate equipment of
the fiber-optic line path;
- connection joints.
The insertion attenuation in the permanent connection (sleeve) for the single-mode optical
fiber should be no more than 0,10 DB, additional attenuations inserted due to the tight laying
of fiber in the sleeve – no more than 0,01 DB; for the multi-mode optical fiber - 0,30 DB and
и 0,03 DB, correspondingly.
At the measurement it is necessary to follow the GOST 26814 and OST (Industrial
Standard) 45.62.
6.11. Sanitary-and-hygienic provision
6.11.1. The measures on the sanitary-and-hygienic provisions included in the WEP should
be developed on the base of technical solutions described in the COP.
6.11.2. The premises where emission of the harmful chemical substances can occur should
be equipped with the special isolated input-extract ventilation systems.
The ventilation systems should provide the standard parameters of the air media per the
maximal working shift, taking into consideration the possible contamination of air with
harmful gases, dust, oil and welding aerosols, toxic emissions from bitumen, paints,
varnishes, etc.
6.11.3. To decrease the content of dust in the air to the standard value the dust suppression
or dust catching facilities should be provided, as well as application of machines for
development of headings with local exhaust systems.
6.11.4. For the people working in the open air, in the conditions of frozen grounds, and in
the non-heated premises the points of heating and environmental shelters with the air
temperature of 22 - 24 °С should be installed at the distance no more than 100m from the
working place and outside the dangerous area.
6.11.5. For underground workers the underground places for eating, drinking fountains,
and lavatories should be provided.
At the construction sites the lighted lavatories should be provided at the distance no more
than 100m from the working places.
7. COMMISSIONING
7.1. Acceptance Committees
7.1.1. At the initial stage the acceptance should be executed by the working and
Page 176 of 295

departmental acceptance committees, at the final stage – by the state acceptance committee.
The working committees should be appointed by the customer on the base of written notice
from the general contractor regarding the readiness of the object to the commissioning.
The departmental acceptance committees should be appointed by the head of Underground
Railroad 30 days before the stipulated commissioning date on the base of written notice from
the contractor regarding the readiness of the object to the commissioning.
7.1.2. The order and duration of work of the working personnel and departmental
acceptance committees is stipulated by the customer after the agreement with the general
contractor.
The order of work of the state acceptance committee should be stipulated by the authorities
appointing the committee.
The chairman of the committee should be appointed by the person or authority appointing
the committee.
7.1.3. The committee should include representatives of the customer, operating
organization, general contractor, subcontractor organizations, general designer, governmental
supervision authorities (sanitary, fire according to the NPB 05, ecological, mining-andtechnical), technical labor inspection of the trade union, civil defense and emergency unit,
and, where appropriate, representatives of other organizations.
To check the observance of safety margins of the structures and facilities according to the
GOST 23961 the separate working committee should be appointed.
Replacement of the committee members can be conducted by the authority appointing the
committee.
7.1.4. The committees in case of necessity have the right to form the specialized
subcommittees on the checking of readiness of separate buildings, structures, facilities, and
equipment from their composition.
The order of work of the subcommittees should be stipulated by the chairman of the
committee; the results of work should be approved by acts.
7.1.5. For the commissioning of the construction objects in the whole the general
contractor should submit the documentation according to the Appendix 7А to the acceptance
committee. After the completion of the committee work the documentation should be sent to
the operating services.
7.1.6. The working and departmental committees during the process of work should:
- check the correspondence of the executed construction-and-mounting works to the labor
safety measures, provision of the fire and explosion safety, environmental protection and antiseismic measures stipulated in the project documentation, standards, construction standards
and regulations with execution, where appropriate, the control testing of the structures;
- check the correspondence of the objects and mounted equipment to the project
documentation, consider the results of testing and complex testing of the equipment, readiness
of the objects to operation including the taking of measures on provision of healthy and safety
labor conditions and environmental protection;
- conduct the acceptance of the equipment.
7.1.7. The general contractor should submit to the working and departmental committees:
- list of organizations participated in the construction-and-mounting works with indication
of kinds of works executed by them, and surnames of the engineering-and-technical
specialists directly responsible for execution of these works;
- set of the working drawings on the construction of the object submitted to the acceptance
with records regarding the correspondence of the life-size works to these drawings or to the
changes inserted in them by the persons responsible for the execution of CMW. The indicated
set of working drawings is the executive documentation;
- certificates, technical certificates, and other documents certifying the quality of materials,
structures, and details applied during the execution of CMW;
Page 177 of 295

- concealed works acceptance acts and acts of intermediate acceptance of separate critical
structures (arches, vaults, supporting walls, bearing metal and pre-fabricated reinforced
concrete structures);
- acts of individual testing of mounted equipment, pipelines, and networks;
- acts of testing of facilities providing the explosion safety, fire safety, and lightning safety;
- acts of testing of strength of structures located in the seismic regions;
- log-books of execution of works and field supervision of the project organizations,
materials of investigations and inspections conducted by the governmental and other
supervision authorities during the construction process.
N o t e – The forms of acts and log-books are represented in the appendices.

7.1.8. The working committees by the results of works should submit the acts of readiness
of the completed construction object or structure to the state acceptance committee according
to the Appendix 7B, the working committee on the checking of the tunnel dimensions –
according to the Appendix 7.2K.
7.1.9. The departmental acceptance committees appointed for commissioning of the freestanding buildings and structures, built-in or attached production and auxiliary premises, civil
defense facilities included in the object composition in case of necessity of their putting into
operation during the process of the object construction, as well as separate structures and
kinds of works not included in the start-up facilities of the object should submit the acts of the
object commissioning according to the Appendix 7C (applicably).
7.1.10. In case the committees take the decision of unserviceability of the object they
should submit the substantiated conclusion regarding that to the authorities appointing the
committee, customer, general contractor, and general designer.
7.1.11. Commissioning of the engineering equipment should be executed after the
completion of start-up and adjustment works.
7.2. Quality control, acceptance of construction works and facilities
7.2.1. The customer should conduct the acceptance of executed works during the all
construction period by the way of collaborative examination of the life-size works and
checking of correspondence of these works to the project.
7.2.2. The quality control of the construction works should be conducted by the executor of
works, inspection of the customer technical supervision, and field supervision of the project
organization. The control results should be registered in the works execution log-book
according to the Appendices 7.2А, 7.2B, 7.2C, 7.2D, 7.2E, and 7.2F. The parameters of
quality evaluation of the executed works should be reflected in their commissioning acts
according to the Appendices 7.2G, 7.2H, 7.2I.
7.2.3. The concealed works acceptance should be conducted for the following works:
- injection of solution under the lining;
- installation of the cast-in-situ lining reinforcement bars;
- welding of the metal water-proofing;
- preparation of the liner surface before the installation of water diversion hood;
- cement grouting under the lining;
- backfilling of temporary openings.
N o t e – At the acceptance of the extra critical structures the participation of representatives of the design
organizations executing the field supervision is mandatory.

7.2.4. At the acceptance of works on the construction of tunnel structures the inspection of
the life-size structure should be conducted, their correspondence to the working
documentation, technical conditions of the execution of works, and the present Summary of
regulations should be examined, cleanness of the lining surface, quality of filling of the
calking joints, bolted and other holes, correction of small defects in linings, lack of leakage
and wet spots should be checked.
The following should be submitted at the acceptance:
- working drawings with records regarding the correspondence of the life-size executed
Page 178 of 295

works to these drawings, signed by the persons responsible for execution of CMW and
approved by the design organization (executive drawings);
- documents certifying the quality of applied materials, structures, and details;
- concealed works acceptance acts, log-books of execution of works and field supervision.
7.2.5. At the acceptance of the pre-fabricated tunnel linings the following should be
checked:
- internal dimensions of the laid rings;
- location of the rings in plane and profile, their number, bonding of joints, width of the
gap between rings, as well as availability of bolts;
- execution of the anti-corrosion protection, filling of the under-lining cavities with
solution.
In addition, availability of leakage, wet spots, fissures, benches between the blocks, chips,
and deformed blocks.
Correctness of the assembling of the tunnel lining rings should be checked by
measurement of horizontal and vertical diameters of the each ring, as well as two diameters
located under the 45° angle to the horizon.
The allowable deviations of the real dimensions of the pre-fabricated tunnel linings from
their design position should not exceed the value according to the Appendix 6А.
At the acceptance the executive drawings on the tunnel lining rings and pre-fabricated
structures laying at the cut-and-cover method of works, certificates on the pre-fabricated
structures, data of the surveying measurements, information about the geometry and
deviations of the laid rings from the design positions, and log-books on the execution of the
following works should be submitted:
- injection of solution under the lining (Appendices 7.2D and 7.2E);
- calking works (Appendix 7.2C);
- glued water-proofing (Appendix 7.2F), as well as protocols of laboratory analysis of
chemical composition of the ground waters.
7.2.6. At the acceptance of works on water-proofing of the pre-fabricated lining of the
tunnels constructed by the closed method the selective control of quality of the separate
operations execution by the way of control tightening of plugs (about 5 %) and control
tightening of bolts (about 3 %) of the total defined number should be conducted.
The quality of works on injection of solution under the lining and elimination of leakage
should be defined by the external inspection, checking of lack of cavities under the lining
using the metal feeler through the drilled out wells, and injection of solution into the newly
drilled wells.
The water-proofing of linings is considered as passed the hydraulic testing and subjected to
acceptance if it shows the water impermeability after the 3h testing at the indicated in the
project documentation hydrostatic pressure registering by the reference pressure gauges of the
testing circuit.
The quality of cemented ground surrounding the lining should be defined by the injection
of water into the reference wells drilled with 40 - 60 cm penetration to the ground.
The injection is considered as completed and satisfactory if the specific water absorption of
the ground is lowered, and does not exceed 0,01l/min.
At the inspection of water-proofing quality the log-books on the injection of solution and
calking of joints should be submitted.
7.2.7. Acceptance of the executed works on the arrangement of glued water-proofing in
tunnels should be executed according to the VSN 104.
The glued surface is considered as dry if the rolled material cannot be torn off without the
breaking.
During the control of gluing of separate water-proofing layers the following should be
checked:
Page 179 of 295

- integrity of the layer and correctness of connection of sheets at the joints;
- lack of defects: air and water bubbles, detachments, folds, fissures, sharp bending and
ruptures, slumps, and mechanical damages;
- correctness of protection of the water-proofing ends left for extension.
The strength of gluing of the rolled material to the water-proofing should be checked by
trial cleavage near the edge. The gluing is considered as rough is the material or mastic filler
breaking takes place at the cleavage.
The general constructor should submit to the customer log-books on hydro-proofing works,
concealed works acceptance acts, executive documentation, certificates on the applied
materials, samples of the water-proofing material and ready coating for comparison with the
project requirements, technical conditions, norms and standards.
7.2.8. At the acceptance of cast-in-situ concrete and reinforced concrete structures of
tunnels the contractor should submit to the customer:
- executive drawings on lining with data of surveying measurements;
- certificates certifying the mark and quality of applied materials;
- log-books of execution of concrete or reinforced concrete works;
- log-books of injection of solution under the lining;
- concealed works acceptance acts;
- protocols of laboratory analysis of the chemical composition of the ground waters;
- tunnel lining testing acts according to the GOST 18105;
- data of the chemical analysis of ground waters.
At the acceptance of reinforcement bars of reinforced concrete structures of tunnels the
following should be checked:
- correspondence of the steel marks by certificates to the working drawings, diameters,
number, and position of the working and distributing reinforcement bars;
- quality of assembling of frame, tying of elements at the joints, connections of rods and
quality of welding of the reinforcement bars rods by the reference samples.
7.2.9. At the acceptance of the superstructure and contact rail the checking of their
parameters according to the project documentation and GOST 23961 should be executed.
The robustness of the superstructure should be checked by running of the rolling stocks
(testing trains) at the traffic speed stipulated by the state acceptance committee in
correspondence with the project documentation.
7.2.10. Checking of clearance gauge for buildings and equipment should be executed using
the clearance trolley (reference gauge) and finally – clearance car. Elimination of the revealed
deviations should be executed in correspondence with the instructions - Appendix 7.2L.
7.2.11. Commissioning of the object where the newly utilized technology has been applied
should be conducted regardless from the correspondence of the received parameters to the
design data providing that all works stipulated by the working documentation have been
executed.
7.3. Startup and adjustment works
7.3.1. The mounted engineering equipment should be transferred to the customer by act for
the further execution of start-up and adjustment works.
7.3.2. The start-up and adjustment works should be executed in correspondence with the
SNiP 3.01.04, SNiP 3.05.01, SNiP 3.05.05, Regulations [1], working documentation,
technical conditions and operating documentation issued by the manufacturers of equipment.
7.3.3. The start-up and adjustment works includes checking, adjustment, tuning, training,
and electrical measurements of the equipment and systems, as well as their control startup
(testing). The works should be executed before the individual testing, during the adjustment
and at the complex testing of the equipment.
The metering devices applied at the execution of start-up and adjustment works should be
tested according to the GOST 8.002.
Page 180 of 295

Scope and program of the start-up and adjustment works should correspond to the
technical conditions of the equipment manufacturers, labor safety engineering regulations, fire
safety, and for escalators, hoisting equipment and equipment operating under the pressure – to
the requirements of the State Technical Supervision of Russia.
During the execution of start-up and adjustment works the parameters of the equipment
and systems should be brought to the design values or (in case of their lack) to the certificate
values indicated by the manufacturer.
7.3.4. The required additional works revealed during the process of adjustment and
complex testing of the equipment, not provided by the project documentation, should be
executed in the established order.
7.3.5. The equipment defects revealed during the process of individual testing and
adjustment should be eliminated by the customer of manufacturer before the object
commissioning.
7.3.6. The engineering-and-technical personnel of the organizations accepting the object
into operation can participate in the start-up and adjustment works.
7.3.7. The start-up and adjustment works should be registered in the protocols of
measurement of technological parameters, testing, and approved by acts of complex testing
according to the Appendices 7.3А and 7.3B.
The customer should submit to the adjustment organization:
- two sets of the project documentation approved for the execution of works;
- set of the operation documentation issued by manufacturers;
- design working parameters of the equipment, settings of electrical protection, locking,
and automation;
- spare parts and special tools supplied in complete with the equipment.
7.3.8. The customer appoints the responsible representatives on the acceptance of start-up
and adjustment works, coordinates the works execution periods, assigns the premises for
adjustment personnel at the object and provides their security, creates the necessary
conditions of labor safety and production sanitary at the object.
7.3.9. The complex testing of the escalators should be executed by the way of 48-hour run
of the each escalator without load - 24 h upward and 24 h downward.
7.3.10. The start-up and adjustment works on the communication facilities should be
executed during the process of mounting works.
The putting the radio transmitter on the air at their adjustment is allowed only at the
frequencies indicated by the customer.
7.3.11. The photometric measurements of the lighting installations should be conducted
according to the GOST 24940.
Horizontal illuminance in the passenger premises should be measured on the line of the
central longitudinal axis under the lamps and between them, as well as at the distance of 1 m
from the premises walls or the platform edge.
7.4. Commissioning of the construction objects
7.4.1. The state acceptance committee should:
- check the elimination of deficiencies, revealed by the working committees, and readiness
of the object to the commissioning. The indicated checking should be conducted according to
the program compiled by the customer and approved by the state acceptance committee;
- evaluate the progressiveness of the technological and architectural-and-construction
solutions, and the object I the whole;
- appoint, where appropriate, the control testing and inspections of the structures and
equipment;
- check the correspondence of the putting into operation facilities and real cost of the object
(for the customer) and construction object cost estimate according to the approved feasibility
study. In case of deviations the committee should analyze the reasons of their occurrence. The
Page 181 of 295

results of analysis with corresponding proposals should be represented to the authorities
appointing the committee.
7.4.2. The customer represents to the committee documentation according to the Appendix
7А, as well as:
- reference of elimination of deficiencies, revealed by the working committees;
- approved design and estimate documentation and reference of the main technical-andeconomical indices of the object;
- list of the design, scientific-and-research and surveying organizations participating in the
object designing;
- documents on the assignment of the land sites;
- documents on the special water consumption;
- documents on the geodetic demarcation base for construction, as well as on geodesic
works executed by the customer during the construction process;
- documents on the geology and hydro-geology in the construction region, on the results of
testing of the ground and ground water analysis;
- certificates on the equipment and mechanisms;
- acts of the acceptance of structures, buildings, and equipment by the working committees
according to the Appendices 7.2G, 7.2H, 7.2I, 7.3А, 7.3B, 7.3C1, 7.3C1-1, 7.3.C2, 7.3.C3,
7.3.C4, 7.3C5, 7.3D1, 7.3.D2, 7.3.D3, 7.3.D4, 7.3D5, 7.3E, 7.3F, 7.3G, 7.3H, 7.3I;
- reference on the provision of the object with operating staff and designated for its service
sanitary-and-domestic premises, catering points, living and public buildings;
- reference on the provision of the object with material-and-technical resources, including
the electric power, water, steam, gas, compressed air, etc;
- references issued by the municipal operating organizations regarding the provision of the
normal operation of the object and acceptance of the object for servicing by the external water
supply, sewerage, heating, gas and power supply, and communication services;
- reference on the correspondence of the putting into operation facilities (for the initial
period of development of the project facilities) to the facilities stipulated by the project;
- reference on the real cost of construction, signed by the customer and contractor;
- documents on the permission for the operation of the objects and equipment subordinated
to the corresponding governmental supervision authorities, representatives of which have not
been included in the composition of the state acceptance committee;
- summary materials of the working committees regarding the readiness of the object in the
whole to the commissioning by the state acceptance committee.
The listed documentation after the object commissioning should be kept by the customer;
in case of the common customer – by the corresponding operating organizations.
7.4.3. The state acceptance committee by the results of work submits the act of the object
commissioning according to the Appendix 7C.
The chairman of the state acceptance committee should submit to the appointing the
committee authority:
- act of the object commissioning;
- draft of the decision of the authority appointing the state acceptance committee regarding
the approval of the act of the object commissioning;
- composition of the approved startup complex and explanatory note.
7.4.4. Consideration of the act of the object commissioning, taking the decisions by the
results of the consideration of objections of the separate members of the committee, and
approval of the act by the authorities appointing the committee should be conducted during
the period not exceeding one month.
7.4.5. The authorities of the state acceptance committee lose their force from the moment
of approval of the act of the object commissioning.
7.4.6. The order of work of the departmental acceptance committee should be stipulated
Page 182 of 295

according to the clause 7.1 applicably to the composition and designation of the structures or
premises submitted to the acceptance.
The deputy heads of Underground Railroads or managers of services and departments to
whom the commissioned objects or structures would be subordinated should be appointed as
chairmen of the departmental committees.
APPENDIX 2А
(mandatory)
REGULATORY REFERENCES
The references to the following regulatory documents are used in the present Summary of
regulations.
SNiP II-23-81* Steel structures
SNiP 2.01.07-85* Loads and effects
SNiP 2.02.01-83* Basements of buildings and structures
SNiP 2.02.04-88 Basements and foundations on ever-frozen grounds
SNiP 2.02.07-91* Industrial transport
SNiP 2.03.11-85 Protection of construction structures from corrosion
SNiP 2.04.01-85* Internal water pipeline and sewerage buildings
SNiP 2.04.02-84* Water supply, external networks and structures
SNiP 2.04.03-85 Sewerage. External networks and structures
SNiP 2.05.03-84* Bridges and pipes
SNiP 2.06.15-85 Engineering protection of territories from the flood and submergence
SNiP 2.09.04-87* Administrative and domestic buildings
SNiP 3.01.01-85* Organization of the construction production
SNiP 3.01.04-87 Commissioning of the completed constructionм objects. General
provisions
SNiP 3.02.01-87 Ground structures, basements and foundations
SNiP 3.02.03-84 Underground openings
SNiP 3.03.01-87 Bearing and enclosing structures
SNiP 3.04.03-85 Protection of the construction structures and facilities from corrosion
SNiP 3.05.01-85 Internal sanitary-and-technical systems
SNiP 3.05.05-84 Technological equipment and technological pipelines
SNiP 3.05.06-85 Electrotechnical facilities
SNiP 3.05.07-85 Automation systems
SNiP 11-02-96 Engineering researches for construction. General provisions
SNiP 12-03-2001 Labor safety in construction. Part 1. General requirements
SNiP 12-04-2002 Labor safety in construction. Part 2. Construction production
SNiP 20-01-2003 Serviceability of construction structures and basements. General
provisions of calculation
SNiP 21-01-97* Fire safety of buildings and structures
SNiP 22-01-95 Geo-physics of dangerous environmental effects
SNiP 22-02-2003 Engineering protection of territories, buildings and structures from the
dangerous geological process. General provisions of designing
SNiP 23-01-99* Construction climatology
SNiP 23-03-2003 Noise protection
SNiP 23-05-95* Natural and artificial lighting
SNiP 32-01-95 1520 mm rail gage railroads
SNiP 32-02-2003 Underground Railroads
SNiP 41-01-2003 Heating, ventilation, and conditioning
SNiP 41-02-2003 Heating networks
SNiP 52-01-2003 Concrete and reinforced concrete structures. General provisions
GOST 1412-85 Cast iron with flaked graphite for casting. Marks
Page 183 of 295

GOST 3262-75* Steel pipes for water and gas pipelines. Technical conditions
GOST 6942-98 Cast iron sewerage pipes and profile parts to them. General technical
conditions
GOST 7293-85 Cast iron with globular graphite for casting. Marks
GOST 7392-85* Crushed rocks from the natural stones for ballast layer of the railroad
track. Technical conditions
GOST 7394-85* Gravel and gravel-and-sandy ballast for the railroad track. Technical
conditions
GOST 8732-78* Hot-deformed seamless steel tubes. Assortment
GOST 8816-70* Wooden bars for the wide rail gage railroad track switches. Technical
conditions
GOST 9479-98 Rock blocks for production of architectural-and-construction, memorial,
and other goods. Technical conditions
GOST 9480-89 Sawn face slabs from natural stone. Technical conditions
GOST 9583-75* Cast iron pressure tubes manufactured by the centrifugal and
semicontinuous casting method. Technical conditions
GOST 9940-81* Hot-deformed seamless corrosion-resistant steel tubes. Technical
conditions
GOST 10060.0-95 Concretes. Freeze resistance definition methods. General requirements
GOST 10060.4-95 Concretes. Structural-and-mechanical method of prompt definition of
freeze resistance
GOST 10180-90 Concretes. Method of definition of hardness by the reference samples
GOST 10434-82* Electrical contact connections. Classification. General technical
requirements
GOST 10629-88 Pre-stressed reinforced concrete cross-ties for 1520 mm rail gage
railroads. Technical conditions
GOST 10704-91 Longitudinal electric welded steel tubes. Assortment
GOST 10922-90 Welded reinforcing and embedded items, welded joints of reinforcing and
embedded items of the reinforced concrete structures. General technical conditions
GOST 12730.5-84* Concretes. Water-proofing definition methods
GOST 13078-81 Liquid sodium glass. Technical conditions
GOST 14098-91 Welded joints of reinforcing and embedded items of the reinforced
concrete structures. Types, structure and dimensions
GOST 15150-69 Machines, devices, and other technical goods. Executions for different
climatic regions. Category, conditions of operation, storage, and transportation with respect to
the effect of environmental climatic factors
GOST 18105-86* Concretes. Hardness control regulations
GOST 22733-2002 Grounds. Method of laboratory definition of the maximal density
GOST 22830-77* Wooden cross-ties for Underground Railroad. Technical conditions
GOST 23407-78 Inventory fencings of the construction sites and areas of execution of
construction-and-mounting works. Technical conditions
GOST 23961-80 Underground Railroads. Structural clearances, equipment and rolling
stocks
GOST 24940-96 Buildings and structures. Illuminance measurement methods
GOST 26633-91* Concretes heavy and fine-grained. Technical conditions
GOST 26814-86 Fiber-optic cables. Parameters measurement methods
GOST 27751-88 Serviceability of construction structures and basements. General
provisions of calculation.
GOST 30547-97* Roof and water-proofing rolled materials. General technical conditions
GOST 8.002-86 State System for Ensuring Uniform Measurement. Governmental
supervision and departmental control of the metering facilities. General provisions
Page 184 of 295

GOST 9.402-80* Unified system of corrosion and ageing protection. Varnish coats.
Preparation of metal surfaces to painting
GOST 9.602-89* Unified system of corrosion and ageing protection. Underground
structures. General requirements to the anti-corrosion protection
GOST 12.1.004-91* Occupational safety standards system. Fire safety. General
requirements
GOST 12.1.005-88* Occupational safety standards system. General sanitary-and-hygienic
requirements to the air in the working area
GOST 12.4.059-89 Occupational safety standards system. Construction. Preventive
inventory fencings. General technical conditions
GOST 17.1.3.13-86 Environmental protection. Hydrosphere. General requirements to the
protection of surface waters from pollutions
GOST 17.1.5.02-80 Environmental protection. Hydrosphere. Hygienic requirements to the
water objects recreation area
GOST 17.4.2.01-81 Environmental protection. Soils. Sanitary conditions indices
nomenclature
GOST 17.4.3.06-86 Environmental protection. Soils. General requirements to the soils
classification on the effect of chemical substances contamination on them
GN 2.1.6.1338-03 Maximum allowable concentration (MAC) of contamination substances
in the inhabitant areas air
SanPiN 2.2.4.548-96 Hygienic requirements to the production premises microclimate
SanPiN 2.1.6.1032-01 Hygienic requirements to the provision of inhabitant areas air
quality
SanPiN 2.1.4.1074-01 Drinking water. Hygienic requirements to the quality of water in the
centralized drinking water supply systems. Quality control
SanPiN 2.2.1/2.1.1.1200-03 Sanitary protective areas and sanitary classification of
enterprises, structures, and other objects
SanPiN № 4630-88 Sanitary regulations and standards of protection of the surface waters
from pollutions
SN 484-76 Instructions on the engineering researches in mining openings designated for
location of national economy objects
SP 3.5.3.1029-02 Sanitary-epidemiological requirements to the conduction of deratization
SP 11-102-97 Engineering-and-ecological researches for construction
SP 11-105-97 Engineering-and-geological researches for construction. Part 1. General
regulations of execution of works
SP 23-104-2004 Evaluation of noise at the designing, construction, and operation of the
Underground Railroad objects
SP 23-105-2004 Evaluation of vibration at the designing, construction, and operation of the
Underground Railroad objects
SP 32-106-2004 Underground Railroads. Additional structures and facilities
SP 33-101-2003 Definition of the main design hydro-geological characteristics
SP 40-102-2000 Designing and mounting of the water supply and sewerage pipeline
systems from polymeric materials. General requirements
SP 41-101-95 Designing of the heating points
NPB 05-93 Order of participation of the Russian Federation governmental fire safety
supervision authorities in the work of committees on the commissioning of completed
construction objects
NPB 77-98 Technical facilities of fire annunciation and control of evacuation. General
technical requirements. Testing methods
NPB 88-2001* Firefighting and fire alarm installations. Designing standards and
regulations
Page 185 of 295

NPB 104-03 Systems of annunciation and control of people evacuation at the fire in the
buildings and structures
NPB 110-03 List of buildings, structures, premises, and equipment to be protected by the
automatic firefighting and fire alarm installations
NPB 151-2000 Fire cabinets. General fire safety requirements. Testing methods
NPB 160-97 Signaling colors. Fire safety signs. Kinds, dimensions, general technical
requirements
NPB 238-97* Fireproof cable coatings. General technical requirements and testing
methods
NPB 239-97 Air-ducts. Fire resistance testing methods
NPB 241-97 Valves of the firefighting ventilation systems. Fire resistance testing methods
NPB 249-97 Lamps. Fire safety requirements. Testing methods
PB 03-428-02 Safety regulations at the construction of underground facilities
PB 03-576-03 Regulations of arrangement and safety operation of pressure vessels
PB 10-77-94 Regulations of arrangement and safety operation of escalators
PB 10-382-00 Regulations of arrangement and safety operation of hoisting cranes
PB 10-403-01 Regulations of arrangement and safety operation of lifting platform for
disabled people
PB 13-407-01 Common safety regulations at the blast works
PPB 01-03 Fire safety regulations in the Russian Federation
PUE Regulations of arrangement of the electrical installations
OND-1-84 Instructions on the order of consideration, coordination, and expertise of the air
protection measures and issue of permissions for contamination substances emission
OST 45.62-97 Line equipment of subscriber lines of office-and-production automated
stations. Operating standards. Ministry of communication of Russia
OSTN-600-93 Industrial construction-and-technical standards on the mounting of
structures, communication, radio broadcasting and television facilities
STN C-01-95 1520 mm rail gage railroads
VSN 48-93 Regulations of erection of cast-in-situ concrete and reinforced concrete linings
for transport tunnels
VSN 104-93 Standards of designing and arrangement of water-proofing of Underground
Railroad tunnels constructed by the cut-and-cover method
VSN 126-90 Standards of designing and execution of works on the shoring of openings by
shotcreting and anchors at the construction of transport and Underground Railroad tunnels
VSN 127-91 Instructions on designing and execution of works on the artificial decrease of
the ground waters level at the construction of tunnels and Underground Railroads
VSN 132-92 Regulations of execution and acceptance of works on injection of solutions
under the tunnel lining
VSN 160-69 Instructions on geodetic and surveying works at the construction of transport
tunnels
VSN 189-78 Instructions on designing and execution of works on the artificial freezing of
grounds at the construction of Underground Railroads and tunnels
PR 32 DS 10.01-95 Regulations of laying and mounting of cables of the signaling
arrangement. НИИЖА. 1995
PR 32 DS 10.02-96 Regulations of mounting of the signaling arrangement. НИИЖА. 1997
POT Р М-016-2001/RD 153-34.0-03.150-00 Interindustrial regulations on the labor safety
(safety regulations) at the operation of electrical installations
RD 04-355-00 Methodical recommendations on organization of production control of
observance of requirements of the industrial safety at the dangerous production objects
RD 07-225-98 Instructions on the order of liquidation and conservation of underground
structures not connected with extraction of commercial minerals
Page 186 of 295

RD 34.45-51.300-97 Scope and standards of testing of electrical equipment
RD 153-34.0-20.527-98 Regulatory instructions on the calculation of short-circuit currents
and selection of the electrical equipment
SO 153-34.21.122-2003 Instructions on the arrangement of lightning protection of
buildings, structures, and industrial communications
TU 11-91 «Alfa» product. Technical conditions ЕТ 0.029.026 ТУ
TU 2246-049-00203387-99 «Hydroplast» sheets for water-proofing
TU 5865-001-00043920-96 Pre-fabricated reinforced concrete goods for the Underground
Railroad facilities
КSC Metro-2 Industrial standards of artificial lighting of the production objects and rolling
stocks of Underground Railroads. ВНИИЖТ. 1987
STP-013-2001 Dowel shoring of pits and slopes in the transport construction
STP-014-2001 Structure and technology of construction of trench walls in the ground for
the objects of transport construction
Bibliography
[1] Instructions for executor of works and construction foreman. Laying of track and
contact rail of Underground Railroad. - М.: SNIiINTI orgtransstroy. Mintransstroy of the
USSR, 1971.
[2] Technical instructions on the arrangement, laying, and content of the continuous
welded rail track, approved by Ministry of Railways of Russia 03.10.91
[3] Method of evaluation of natural protection of operating water-bearing stratums. - М.:
VSEGINGEO, 1972.
[4] Temporary regulations of the environmental protection from production and
consumption waste in Russian Federation. - М.: Ministry of nature of Russia, 1994.
[5] Designer guidebook. Noise protection. - М.: Stroyizdat, 1974.
[6] Manual on calculation and designing of the noise absorption in the industrial buildings.
- М.: Stroyizdat, 1982.
[7] Instructions on the I, II, III, IV class leveling. - М.: Nedra, 1990.
[8] Instructions on signalization at the Underground Railroads of Russian Federation. - М.:
Economic association «Metro», 1995.
[9] Regulations of technical operation of the Underground Railroads of Russian
Federation. - М.: Economic association «Metro», 1995.
[10] Recommendations on designing and operation of lighting installations in the
passenger premises of the Underground Railroad stations. - М.: MNIITEP, 1989.
[11] Methodical instructions on execution of microclimatic investigations during the
research period. - М.: Hydrometeoizdat, 1968.
[12] Letter of the Gosstroy of Russia dated 11.03.1998. № OF-132/13.
[13] Provisions on the water protection zones (bands) of rivers, lakes, and water-storage
reservoirs. Statement of the RF government № 1404 dated 23.11.1996
[14] Methodical instructions on designing of piled shoring of the Underground Railroad
pits. - М.: CNIIS, 1986.
[15] Manual on designing and technology of the anchor fastening facilities in the transport
construction. - М.: CNIIS, 1987.
[16] Manual on designing of underground structures in seismic regions. - М.: CNIIS, 1996.
[17] Tunnels and Underground Railroads/Under the edition of B.G.Khrapov. - М.:
Transport, 1989.
[18] Boulychev N.S. Mechanics of the underground structures. - М.: Nedra, 1994.
APPENDIX 2B
(mandatory)
TERMS, DEFINITIONS, AND ABREVIATIONS
The following terms with corresponding definitions are applied in the present Summary of
Page 187 of 295

regulations.
N o t e – the list of terms and definitions is represented in the alphabetic order.

Terms and definitions
Emergency exit is the way of the personnel exit from the production and other premises,
meeting the requirements of the SNiP 21-01
Ventilation duct is the premises (tunnel, bay, corridor, shaft, etc) with free passage along
the whole length used as the air-duct in the tunnel ventilation systems.
Ventilation-and-cable duct is the premises (see ventilation duct) used for placement the
cables as well.
Ventilation cabinet (ventcabinet, cabinet) is the free-standing or built-in structure on the
ground surface used in the ventilation systems for the air intake or discharge.
Ventilation installation is the aggregate of ventilation, electrotechnical, and auxiliary
equipment together with the premises where it is located, horizontal, inclined, or vertical
ventilation ducts, and facility for the air intake (discharge).
Contact rail distance is the area there the contact rail is divided to the separate sections.
Operlapped (non-overlapped) CROS is the distance between two sections of contact rail
the length of which is less (more) than the distance between the current collectors of one car.
Galvanic separation is the absence of continuous communication by metal in the
construction structures, electrical network conductors, etc.
Galvanic communication is the availability of continuous communication by metal in the
construction structures, electrical network conductors, etc.
Line bedding:
Deep burial bedding is the bedding of line on the depth where the station and main line
tunnels are constructed by the closed method, without daylighting;
Shallow bedding is the bedding of line on the depth where the station is constructed by the
cut-and-cover method, main line tunnels – by cut-and-cover or closed method on the minimal
allowable depth.
Passengers collective protection area is the separate underground premises for
disposition of passengers in case of occurrence of emergency situation in the main line
tunnels dangerous for life or health of passengers, equipped with separate firefighting,
lighting, communication, ventilation, and sewerage systems.
Uninterruptable power supply is the electrical installation consisting of the aggregate of
uninterruptable power supply including accumulator battery and electric power transformers,
and distributing facilities.
Cable structure (tunnel cable collector, corridor, floor, shaft, bay, and chamber) is the
structure with free passage along the whole length designated for location of cables and cable
sleeves.
Underground Railroad line (line) is the independent part of the Underground Railroad
with stations, runs, and dead ends, designated for the single route train traffic.
Underground Railroad is the kind of electrified urban beyond-street (underground,
above-ground, ground) passenger transport.
Construction object (object) is the structure or group of structures integrated by common
functional designation or technological process, construction of which is executed according
to the elaborated and approved in the established order project documentation.
Dangerous production objects are the objects at which the explosive substances are used,
transported, or stored; fixed hoisting mechanisms and escalators are used; mining works, as
well as works in the underground conditions are executed.
Extra protected natural reserve is the urban territory with natural objects situated on it
having the specific environment-oriented, scientific, cultural, aesthetic, recreative and
sanative significance, at which in correspondence with legislation special protection regime is
installed. The national parks, special nature reserves, amenity forests, water conservation
Page 188 of 295

districts, etc, are related to such areas.
Protected zone is the part of urban territory located over the operating structure of the,
Underground Railroad and in the closed proximity to it, possibility of utilization of which for
the new construction, laying of roads, communications, drilling of wells, etc, should be
coordinated with the Underground Railroad administration.
Passengers’ conveyor is the transport installation constituting the permanent moving
surface made from aprons or travelling belt for transportation of passengers at the one and the
same level, or from one level to another.
Interchange facility is the structure between stations designated for passage of the
passengers from one station to another, including the passenger premises (corridors),
escalators, and staircases, production and domestic premises.
Trailing (facing) train traffic is the train traffic on the track switch in the direction from
the frog to the switch blade (from the switch blade to the frog).
Carrying capacity is the volume of passengers’ carriage (thousand passengers per hour) at
the maximum possible traffic (number of cars in train and number of trains per hour) in one or
both directions.
Traffic capacity is the size of traffic (train pairs) that can be executed per the time unit
(hour, day) depending on the technical equipment and train traffic organization method;
calculated number of passengers for different sections of their traffic.
Startup complex is the line section, part of station, electric depot, or other object of the
Underground Railroad together with their engineering systems, distinguished from the
composition of the construction object, capable to provide temporary functioning of the
structure during the first operation period.
Track lines:
main are the tracks for traffic of the trains with passengers on the runs and stations;
station are the tracks for the trains turn-around, storage, and technical maintenance of
rolling stocks;
connecting are the tracks for connection of the line tracks with the tracks of electric depot
or other line;
safety are the dead end tracks designated for preventing of exit of the rolling stock to the
traffic routes;
Electric depot tracks:
parking are the located outside the buildings tracks for conduction of maneuvers, running
of rolling stocks, loading and unloading of cargos;
depot are the located in the buildings tracks for storage, technical maintenance, and repair
of rolling stocks.
High-current (low-current) tunnel side is the side of tunnel located to the left (right)
relating to the train moving in the right direction.
Station is the underground or above-ground stopping point designated for boarding and
alighting of passengers, including the vestibules, escalators or staircases, platform and middle
halls, premises for the passengers’ service, accommodation of operating personnel and
production equipment.
Warm season of the year (for underground structures) is the year period during which the
average monthly temperature of the outside air is higher or equal to the natural temperature of
ground measured before the beginning of the Underground Railroad operation.
Technical zones:
Technical zone for construction is the urban territory allocated in correspondence with
general urban planning for further construction of the Underground Railroad line sections by
the cut-and-cover method, for location of the electric depot and other above-ground
structures, as well as construction of sites by closed method near the construction objects of
the Underground Railroad;
Page 189 of 295

Technical zone for operation is the free site of the urban territory directly adjacent to the
Underground Railroad object and used for provision of normal functioning of the object
(entrance and exit of passengers, location of repair machines, equipment and materials during
the period of repair works).
Difficult conditions are the difficult engineering-and-geological, hydro-geological, and
other local conditions when application of the main designing standards is connected with
considerable increase of the scope of construction-and-mounting works, with the necessity of
radical re-arrangement of structures, creation of new kinds of equipment and facilities, with
demolition of permanent structures, etc.
Dead end is the tunnel with one or two station tracks for turn-around, storage, and
technical maintenance of rolling stocks on the line.
Traction network is the electrical network providing the electric power supply from the
substation to the electrical rolling stock. The traction network includes:
Contact network is the contact rail, power supply cables, cable jumpers between the
contact rail sections, cable to contact rail connection facilities;
Negative boosting main are the track rails, impedance bonds with secondary winding,
electrical connectors of the one track rail sections (by conductor) and different track rails (by
cables or conductors), negative booster cables.
Local ventilation installation is the installation designated for ventilation of production,
domestic, administrative, and other premises of the underground stations and near-tunnel
structures.
Tunnel ventilation installation is the installation designated for ventilation of passenger
premises of the underground stations, main line, dead end, and connecting tunnels.
Cold season of the year (for underground structures) is the year period during which the
average monthly temperature of the outside air is lower than the natural temperature of
ground measured before the beginning of the Underground Railroad operation.
Evacuation exit is the way of passengers exit outside in case of occurrence of emergency
situation dangerous for the life and health of passengers at the station platform or in the main
line tunnels.
Operating personnel (personnel) are the specially prepares persons passed examination of
knowledge in the volume obligatory for the given work or position.
Electrical installation is the aggregate of machines, devices, lines, and auxiliary
equipment together with the premises where they are installed, designated for production,
transformation, transmission, distribution of the electric power, and its conversion to another
kind of energy.
Abbreviations
AB – accumulator battery
AL – automated locking
ADB - administrative-and-domestic building (in the electric depot)
RFS - refueling station
ACP – automated control point
ASA – automated security alarm
ASR – automated speed regulation (of the trains)
AWP – automated working place
AFPS - automated fare payment system
ATS - automated telephone station
AFAI - automatic fire alarm installation
AFFI - automatic firefighting installation
DBW – drill and blast works
AC – air curtain
WAC – warm air curtain
Page 190 of 295

CROS - contact rail overlap span
VCD – video control device
DP – drainage plant
CC – computing center
PAS – public address system
LSC – loud-speaking communication
IL – inflammable liquids
FLM – fuel and lubricating materials
DP – dispatcher point
TDP – traffic dispatcher point (of the trains)
SDP - station dispatcher point
LDP – line dispatcher point (of the Underground Railroad)
PSDP – power supply dispatcher point
IB – impedance bond with secondary winding
DC – dispatching center
RC – remote control
UPS – uninterruptible power supply
SC – short-circuit
CIP - control instrumentation point
LSR – line-switching room
HIL - highly inflammable liquids
LB – local battery
NATM – new Austrian tunneling method (construction)
RISL - reference impact safe level
SRB – storage-and-repair-building
EFDS - extra finely dispersed substances
ОТС – operative technological communication
LI – lighting installation
CU – converting unit
MAE – maximum allowable emissions
RFP – restoration facilities point
SP – smoke protection
MAC - maximum allowable concentration
API – air pollution index
COP – construction organization project
SS – step-down substation
LFDP – lifting platform for disabled people
WEP – works execution project
TMP - technical maintenance point (of rolling stocks)
LB – line box
DP – distributing point
SB - switchboard
RC – rail circuit
TTIRSS – train traffic interval regulation and safety system
СМW - construction-and-mounting works
SNS – satellite navigation system
EWCS - people evacuation warning and control system
TCR – total concentration ratio
SOCS – station operation control system with application of technical facilities
HDW - hard domestic waste
THR – temperature and humidity regime
Page 191 of 295

ТM – technical maintenance
TSS – traction step-down substation
RM – routine maintenance
TU - technical conditions
FS – feasibility study
TTC – train traffic control
RCD - residual current device
TPCU – tunnel passage control unit
LVI - local ventilation installation
TVI - tunnel ventilation installation
DTS – digital transmission system
RFEE – radio frequency electromagnetic emission
EMI – electromechanical installation
EC – electrical centralization
APPENDIX 4А
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE WELL PLUGGING
№ _________, executed at ___________________________________
(object name)

«_____»__________________ 200____ year.
Committee in the composition:
Drilling foreman ________________________________________________________
(name of organization, surname, n.p.)

geologist_______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, surname, n.p.)

manager of the engineering-and-geological researches _______________________
(name of organization, surname, n.p.)

Inspected the works executed by the shift drilling foreman __________________
(name of organization, surname,

__________________________________________________________________________
n.p.)

And compiled the act regarding the following:
Beginning of plugging __________, end of plugging _______________
(date)

Well depth
intervals, m

Well
diameter,
mm

Estimated volume
of the well shaft,
m3

(date)

Name of
grounds

Material for
plugging

Real material
Compacting
consumption, m3
method

Cement mark according to the certificate _________, curing period at the control testing at
the place of well drilling _________ (h). Composition of solution (cement/sand)
___________ on the water _________ from _________ (water source) in the amount
_________ (l). Solution into the well injection method _________
Depth of the combo column top before the curing _________ m.
Combo curing wait time _____ (h): from _____ (h) to _____ (h) _____ 200___ year
Depth of the combo column top after the curing _____ m.
Combo shrinkage value _____ m.
Additional information on the well plugging _______________________
___________________________________________________________________________
Decision of the committee:
Page 192 of 295

_______________________________________________________
Signatures:
APPENDIX 5А
(recommended)
MANUAL ON APPLICATION OF CABLES, WIRES, AND BUSES
1. The marks of cables, wires, and buses should be selected depending on the laying
conditions in the structures, and designation of networks according to the present Summary of
regulations and Manual.
2. The sphere of application of cables and wires for different kinds of network is
represented in the tables 3 - 11, items made from из non-ferrous metals – in the table 12.
Other, not indicated in the tables 1 and 2, marks of cables and wires can be applied
providing that their technical parameters are corresponding and agreed with the customer.
3. The cables and wires with aluminum conductors should be applied in all networks
except for the networks indicated in the clause 4. Herewith the design section of aluminum
conductors should be accepted from 16 mm2 and more.
4. The cables and wires with copper conductors should be applied:
- in all networks of the explosion hazardous premises;
- in the lighting networks of the above-ground buildings and structures, including the
station vestibules and substations;
- in the distributing networks of the working and emergency lighting of the underground
stations, substations, tunnels and near-tunnel structures;
- in the network sections of the underground installations between the startup apparatus and
electrical motors, as well as between the DC AB and SB;
- in the networks of secondary commutation of the automation and telemechanical
facilities;
- in the mains and distributing networks of the TTC and communication;
- in the main power networks when according to the calculation one line requires more
than two cables with aluminum conductors;
- in the 825V line contact networks with maximum design traffic capacity of 40 train pairs
per hour and more than six cars in the train.
5. Aluminum buses should be applied for execution of primary connections in the cabinets
and boxes of the AC and DC networks, except for the equipment and networks indicated in
the clause 6.
6. The copper buses and strips should be applied:
- in the cabinets of the 825V traction network of the electric depot parking tracks;
- for flexible compensators of the 825V contact network;
- for connection of middle outputs of the impedance bonds with secondary winding в;
- for the network sections between the AB elements and pass board.
7. The cables for the 10KV rated voltage with conductor section 150 mm2 and more should
be applied with multi-wire conductors.
At the application of cables of the indicated sections with single-wire conductors in the
main line tunnels the limiting clamps should be installed on the cables.
8. The marks of cables with paper insulation for laying by the vertical or inclined route
should be selected in correspondence with the Appendix 6.10.B4.
9. The external diameter of applied cables should not exceed 65 mm.
10. At the definition of the cable length its design length at the each network section
should be increased by 6 % taking into account the bends, turns, bypasses of openings, and
wastes.
In the summary sheets the increase of the cable length in these purposes should not be
provided.
11. The cross-sections of the cable conductors should be selected according to the
Page 193 of 295

calculation, and minimum allowable values should be accepted.
The continuous allowable current loads of the power cables indicated in the table 1 are
given in the tables 13, 14, and 15.
12. The number of reserve conductors in cables should be accepted, %, no less than:
- in the automation and telecontrol networks - 10;
- in the communication mains - 15;
- in the distributing communication networks - 20, but no less than two conductors per
each system.
13. For execution of terminations and connecting sleeves of cables it is necessary to use the
following documentation (see regulatory documents in the Appendix 2А):
а) power cable for the 1 – 10KV voltage - Technical documentation [1];
b) Single-conductor 825V traction networks cables - TMD-133;
c) Control cables - Instruction [2];
d) Cables in the TTC installations - PR 32 DS 10.01;
e) Cables in the communication facilities - Instruction [3].
T a b l e 1 – List of GOST and TU on the cables, wires, and buses applied in the power
supply networks
Cable or wire mark
1. Power cables:
АСБВнг-LS, СБВнг-LS, ЦАСБВнг-LS, ЦСБВнг-LS, АВБВнг-LS, ВБВнг-LS
ААБлУ, АСБУ, ААБнл, ААБ2лУ
АВВГнг-LS, ВВГнг-LS
2. Control cables:
КВБВнг-LS
КВВГнг-LS
КНРПЭВ-М
3. Block-signaling cables СББбШв, СБВБГ, СБВГ, СБPBГ, СБPB
4. Control cable КУПР-П
5. Flexible cable КГН
6. Wires:
ППСРВМ
ПВ
МКШ, МКЭШ
НВ
ПКСВ
ЛТВ-П
7. Buses and strips:
Aluminum bus АДЗ1.Т1
Copper bus ШМГ
Copper strip МГ
Strip ДПРНМ

GOST, TU
TU 16.К71-90
GOST 18410
TU 16.К71-310
TU 16.К71-090
TU 16.К71-310
TU 16-705.141
GOST Р 51312
GOST 18404.2
TU 16.К73.05
TU 16-705.465
GOST 6323
GOST 10348
GOST 17515
TU 16.К71-80
TU 16.К45-001
GOST 15176
GOST 434
GOST 434
GOST 1173

T a b l e 2 - List of GOST and TU on the cables and wires applied in the TTC,
communication, automation, and telecontrol networks
Cable or wire mark
1. Cables in the alarm and locking networks:
СБВГ, СБВБГ, СББбШв, СБPB, СБPBГ
СБВГнг, СБВБГнг, СБВБбГвнг, СБPBбШв, СБЭPBбШв
2. Control cables:
КВБВнг-LS
КВБбШв, КВВБГ, КРВБГ, КПВБ, КВВБ, КРВБ, КВВГ, КРВГ
3. High-frequency main symmetrical cables:
МКСАБпГ, МКСАБпШп, МКС, МКСБГ, МКСБ
4. Low-frequency symmetrical cables of long-haul communication ТЗГ, ТЗБГ, ТЗБ
5. Municipal telephone cables
ТГ, ТБГ, ТБ
ТПВ, ТПВБГ, ТППэп, ТППэPBГ, ТППэPB, ТППэпЗ
6. Station telephone cables ТСВ, ТСВнг

GOST, TU
GOST Р 51312

TU 16.К71-090
GOST 1508
GOST 15125
TU 16.К78-03
TU 16.К71-008
GOST Р 51311
TU 16.К71-005
Page 194 of 295

Cable or wire mark
GOST, TU
7. Fiber-optic cables - ОКНС, ОКНБ
TU 16.К12-16
8. Shipboard cables
КНРЭТП, КНРЭТЭ
GOST 7866.1
СПОЭВЭ
TU 16.505.305
9. Radio frequency cables
РК 50-7-58
TU 16.505.643
РК 75-4-16, РК 75-13-17БГ
GOST 11326.78
РИ-50-17-32
ТУ 16.К76-137
10. Wires
МГШВ
TU 16.505.437
КМС-1, КМС-2, КСБ
TU 16.505.758
НВЭ
GOST 17515
ПВ-1, ПВ-3
GOST 6323
ПМВО
TU 16.505.455
ПКСВ
TU 16.К71-80
ПТВЖ
TU 16.К03-01
ПРРПВМ
TU 16.705.450
РВШЭ
TU 16.505.451
РПШЭ
TU 16.К18.001
ТРВ
TU 16.К04.005
N o t e – Marks of power cables and wires applied in the indicated networks are represented in the Table 1.

T a b l e 3 - 10 KV network cables application area
Mark
recommended
1. Ground route
ААБл, ААБ2лУ, АСБУ
2. Stations, tunnels, substations, electric depot, bridges
АСБВнг-LS
and overhead roads
3. Shafts, escalator tunnels with difference of levels
ЦАСБВнг-LS
more than 15 m
Application area

allowable
СБВнг-LS
ЦСБВнг-LS

Voltage, KV
10
10
10

T a b l e 4 – 825V line traction network cables and wires application area
Mark
recommended
allowable
1. Power supply lines, jumpers between CR
АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
2. Negative booster mines, between track connectors of the АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
track rails
3. Connectors of the copper screen of 3KV cables with IB or АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
track rails (neutralling)
4. IB to track rail connectors
ППСРВМ
Application area

Voltage, KV
3
1
1
1,5

T a b l e 5 - Electric depot 825V traction network cables and wires application area
Mark
recommended
allowable
1. Power supply lines, jumpers between the CR
АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
2. Negative booster mines
АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
3. Jumpers between 825V bus and contact bus conductor in the АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
SRB
4. Connectors between the track rails, between the IB and track
ППСРВМ
rails
5. Connectors of the copper screen of 3KV cables with IB or
ППСРВМ
track rails (neutralling)
Application area

Voltage, KV
3
1
3
1,5
1,5

T a b l e 6 - 380/220, 24, 12V line network cables and wires application area
Mark
recommended
allowable
1. Mine power networks in the tunnels and distributing АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
networks in the near-tunnel structures
2. Distributing power networks:
At the stations, substations, TMP in the dead ends
ВВГнг-LS
Between the startup instrumentation and electrical motors
ВВГнг-LS
Main
АВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS
Application area

Voltage, KV
1

1
1
1

Page 195 of 295

Mark
recommended
allowable

Application area
3. Lighting networks:
Distributing at the stations and substations (working and
emergency lighting)
The same, in the tunnels
Charging of the lighting reinforcement bars
4. 220V DC and less networks at the TSS and UPS
5. Staircases electrical heating networks:
Heating cable under the stairs
Cold ends till the termination boxes

Voltage, KV

АВВГнг,
ПВ, ППВ
ВВнг-LS
ПВЗ
ВВГнг-LS

ВБВнг-LS
ВБВнг-LS

1
0,38
1
0,38
1

КНРПЭВ-М
ВВГнг-LS

-

0,38
1

T a b l e 7 - Electric depot and buildings 380/220 and 12V network cables and wires
application area
Application area
Power and lighting networks:
Main
Distributing

Mark
recommended
allowable
АВБВнг-LS,
ПВ, ППВ
ВВГнг-LS

Voltage, KV
1
0,66
1

ВБВнг-LS
-

T a b l e 8 - Power supply facilities automation and telecontrol network cables and wires
application area
Application area
1. In the tunnels, at the stations:
Main cables of the near-tunnel structure circuits
Main cables of telecontrol circuits
2. In the premises of substations, stations:
Automation circuit cables

Mark
recommended

allowable

Voltage, KV

-

КВБВнг-LS

0,66

In the communication cables (table 9)

КВВГнг-LS
The same, telecontrol
ТПВ
Mounting wires
ПВ1, ПВ3, ПВ2
3. in the control instrumentation circuits, in the control
ВВГнг-LS,
and alarm circuits
МКШ, МКЭШ, НВ
КУПР-П

ПВ1
-

0,66
0,38
0,38
0,38
0,66
0,5
0,25

T a b l e 9 – TTC network cables and wires application area
Application area
1. Main circuits of dispatcher centralization

Mark
recommended
allowable
In the communication cables or separate cable with other
control circuits

2. Distributing networks:
In the tunnels, on the ground surface (in СБВБбШвнг, КВБВнг-LS СББбШВ, СБВБГ, КВБбШВ,
ducts)
КВВБГ, КРВБГ
In the ground
СБPBбШв, КПВБ
СББбШп, СБPB, КВВБ, КРВБ
In the premises
СБВГнг, КВВГнг-LS, ТПВ
СБВГ, КВВГ, КОВГ, ТСВ
3. Power supply networks:
In the tunnels, on the ground surface (in
ВБВнг-LS
ВРБГ
ducts)
In the ground
ВБВнг-LS
НРБ, ВРБ
In the premises
ВВГнг-LS
ВРГ
4. Installation wires (connectors of the line boxes
ППСРВМ
and IB)
5. Mounting wires
МГШВ, ПВ1, ПВ3
-

T a b l e а 10 - Communication network cables and wires application area
Application area

Mark
recommended

allowable

1. Main networks:
High-frequency communication, telecontrol,
control circuits:
Page 196 of 295

Mark

Application area
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
c) in the ground
Low-frequency communication, telecontrol,
control circuits:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
c) in the ground
Public address system circuits:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
2. Distributing communication networks
Complex networks:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
c) in the ground
Complex networks including the dispatcher
communication and telecontrol circuits
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
c) in the ground
3. Public address system
networks:
Annunciation circuits:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
Sound, control, alarm circuits

recommended
МКСБГ, ОКНС
МКС, ОКНБ-М
МКСБ, ОКНБ

allowable
МКСАБпГ, ОКНБ
МКСАБпГ, ОКНБ-М
МКСАБпШп, ОКНС

ТЗБГ, ТБГ
ТЗГ, ТГ
ТЗБ, ТБ

-

ТЗБГ
ТЗГ

-

ТППэPBГ, СБВБбШвнг

ТППВГ СБВБГ, СББбШв,
СБPBГ
СБВГ
ТППэPB, СБPB

ТПВ, СБВГнг
ТППэпШп, СББбШп

ТЗБГ, КНРЭТП
ТЗГ, КНРЭТП
ТЗБ

КНРЭТЭ, КМПЭВЭ,
СПОЭВЭ
КНРЭТЭ, КМПЭВЭ,
СПОЭВЭ
-

distributing

4. Tele-monitoring networks:
Video picture signal circuits:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
Control circuits:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
5. Municipal telephone input networks:
In the municipal telephone conduit
In the Underground Railroad structures:
а) in the tunnel
b) in the premises
6.
Train
and
technological
radio
communication:
Wire channel
Radio channel:
а) in the tunnel and at the station
b) connection of radio station to the
leaky feeder
7. Internal cables:
To the telephones, call repeaters, to the
secondary electric clocks:
а) in the premises
b) in the tunnel
c) in the tunnel, on the one hanger with
termination box

СБВБбШвнг
СБВГнг
КНРЭТП

СББбШв, СБВБГ, СБPBГ
СБВГ, ПРВПМ
КНРЭТЭ, КМПЭВЭ,
СПОЭВЭ

РК-75-13-17 БГ
РК-75-13-17 БГ

-

СБВБбШвнг
СБВГнг

СБВБГ, СББбШв, СБPBГ,
СБЗГ
-

ТППэпЗ

-

ТППэPBГ
ТПВ

ТПPBГ

In the communication cables
РИ-50-17-33нгп
РК-50-7-58

РИ-50-17-32
-

ТРВ, СБВГнг
СБВБбШвнг
РПШЭ, КНРЭТП

СБВГ
СББбШв
-

Page 197 of 295

Application area
To the intermediated points of selective
communication
Radio broadcast network
Public address system:
а) in the premises
b) in the tunnel
c) in the tunnel, from the box to the loudspeaker
8. inter-racks, inter-devices connections of the
communication networks (racks, consoles):
а) in the premises
b) in the tunnel
Public address system circuits:
а) sound, control, alarm:
1) in the premises

Mark
recommended
КНРЭТП

allowable
-

ПТВЖ, ПРПВМ

-

СБВГнг, ПРПВМ
СБВБбШвнг
РПШЭ

СББбШв
-

ТСВ
ТППэPBГ

ТПPBГ
-

СПОЭВ

СПОЭВЭ, КМПЭВ, КНРЭТЭ,
КМПЭВЭ
СПОЭВЭ
РВШЭ

2) in the tunnel
КНРЭТП
b)microphone
РПШЭ
c) control and feeding:
1) in the premises
РПШЭ
2) in the tunnel
КНРЭТП
9. Mounting wires:
Jumpering in the boxes, mounting in the
ПМВО
ПКСВ
communication cabinets
Jumpering in the protective strips
ПКСВ
Microphone circuits
Inter-block and intra-block mounting
РВШЭ
НВЭ
Transmission systems equipment
КМС-1, КМС-2, КСВ
Notes
1. The cable mark should be selected on the base of requirements to provision of standard electrical
parameters of circuits (mutual effect, attenuation, loop resistance).
2. The ТЗ type cables should be applied at the dividing to boxes, the ТП type, as a rule, at the dividing to
telephone boxes.
3. In the graph 1 the «tunnel» means the tunnel itself and near-tunnel structures, the «premises» means the
production and other premises of stations.
4. In the radio communication networks application of imported leaky feeders with correspondent technical
parameters is allowed.

T a b l e 11 – Fire and security alarm network cables and wires application area
Application area

Mark
recommended
allowable

1. Connecting lines:
Main line and escalator tunnels
ТППэPBГ
Service premises of stations
ТПВнг, ТППэп
2. Sections from the receiving station to the alarm and COP
СББбШвнг
board
3. Premises:
Loop from the fire annunciator to the box
ЛТВ-П
Internal circuits
ПКСВ

Voltage, KV

ТППэп
ТПВ
АВВГ

0,66
0,66
1

ЛТВ-В, ТРВ
-

0,66
0,66

T a b l e 12 – Non-ferrous metal items in electrical equipment application area
Application area
1. 825V traction network:
Primary connections in the cabinets with
breakers and in the points of connection to CR:
а) In the tunnels, at the substations, in the SRB
b) at the parking tracks
c) flexible compensator:
Fish plate

Material mark

Dimensions,
mm

GOST

Aluminum bus АДЗ1.Т1
Copper bus ШМГ

10×100
50×100

GOST 15176
GOST 434

Strip МГ

3×100

GOST 434
Page 198 of 295

Strip ДПРНМ

Dimensions,
mm
0,3×100

GOST 1173

АДЗ1.Т1
Copper МЗ

75×8

GOST 15176
GOST 859

Application area

Material mark

compensator
2. 380/220V networks:
Primary connections in the cabinets and boxes
3. Impedance bonds buses

GOST

T a b l e 13 - Continuous allowable current loads of the 10 KV cables
Conductor crosssection, mm2
25
35
50
70
95
120
150
185
240

Current, А, for cables
With copper conductor
With aluminum conductor
In the ground
In the air
In the ground
In the air
119
115
91
87
144
142
110
106
176
175
134
132
212
219
162
161
251
265
192
194
284
305
218
234
318
349
246
264
352
393
275
298
396
455
314
347

T a b l e 14 - Continuous allowable current loads of the single-conductor 1 и 3KV power
cable in the 825V traction network
Conductor crosssection, mm2
95
120
240
300
400
500
625

Current, А, for cables
With copper conductor
With aluminum conductor
In the ground
In the air
In the ground
In the air
438
354
340
275
501
412
389
320
746
655
578
508
848
760
656
688
975
894
756
692
1125
1054
873
818
1304
1251
1011
970

T a b l e 15 - Continuous allowable current loads of the 1KV power cables with PVC
insulation at the laying in the air
Conductor
Current, А, for cables
Conductor
Current, А, for cables
crosscrossWith copper
With aluminum
With copper
With aluminum
section,
section,
conductor
conductor
conductor
conductor
2
2
mm
mm
2,5
38
28
50
188
144
4
50
37
70
232
179
6
63
44
95
280
215
10
84
59
120
318
345
16
102
77
150
359
275
25
123
102
185
406
322
35
159
123
240
473
364
N o t e – At the laying of cables in the ground the currentе loads should be accepted with the 1,13 coefficient,
in the water - 1,3.

Regulatory documents used in the present Manual
[1] Technical documentation on the sleeves for up to 35KV cables with paper and plastic
insulation. - М.: Energoizdat, 1982.
[2] Instruction on the mounting of the connecting sleeves and terminations for the control
cables with plastic and rubber insulation /General electrical mounting. - М.: 1985.
[3] Instruction on the mounting of the communication, radio broadcasting, and television
structures and facilities. - М.: Radio and Communication, 1985.
TMD-133-91 Technological and mounting documentation on the connecting and ending
sleeves (terminations) for the 1 and 3KV single-conductor cables with plastic insulation
designated for the Underground Railroad. - М.: VNIIKP, 1991.
PR 32 DS 10.01-95 Regulations on the laying and mounting of cables of the signaling,
Page 199 of 295

centralization and blocking facilities. - М.: NIIJA, 1995.
GOST 434-78* Rectangular wire and copper buses for electrotechnical purposes.
Technical conditions
GOST 859-78 Copper. Marks
GOST 1173-93 Copper strips. Technical conditions
GOST 1508-78* Е Control cables with rubber and plastic insulation. Technical conditions
GOST 6323-79* Е Wires with PVC insulation for electrical installations. Technical
conditions
GOST Р 51312-99 Signaling and blocking cables with polyethylene insulation in the
plastic sheath. Technical conditions
GOST 7866.1-76 Е Shipboard cables with rubber insulation in the rubber of lead sheath.
Technical conditions
GOST 10348-80* Е Multi-conductor mounting cables with plastic insulation. Technical
conditions
GOST 11326.78-79 Radio frequency cables of the РК 75-13-17; РК 75-13-17-БГ; РК 7513-17-Б; РК 75-13-17-Ба, and РК 75-13-17-К marks. Technical conditions
GOST 15125-92 High-frequency symmetrical communication cables with cordpolystyrene insulation. Technical conditions
GOST 15176-89 Е Molding buses of electrotechnical designation from aluminum and
aluminum alloys. Technical conditions
GOST 17515-72* Е Mounting wires with plastic insulation. Technical conditions
GOST 18404.2-73 Control cables with polyethylene insulation in the rubber sheath.
Technical conditions
GOST 18404.3-73 Control cables with polyethylene insulation in the flexible PVC sheath.
Technical conditions
GOST 18410-73* Е Power cables with soaked paper insulation. Technical conditions
GOST Р 51311-99 Municipal telephone cables with polyethylene insulation in the plastic
sheath. Technical conditions
ТУ 16.К03-01-87 Translational wires with plastic insulation
ТУ 16.К04.005-89 Telephone distributing single-pair wires
ТУ 16.К12-16-97 Fiber-optic cables for local and trunk communication lines of the
Russian directory inquiry service
ТУ 16.К18.001-89 Wires with rubber insulation for the radio and electrical installations
ТУ 16-К45-001-87 Telephone line wires with PVC insulation
ТУ 16.К71-80-90 Station jumper wires with flexible PVC insulation
ТУ 16.К71-090-2002 Power and control cables, flame-retardant, with low smoke and gas
emission
ТУ 16.К71-005-87 Station telephone cables
ТУ 16.К71-008-87 Telephone communication cables with air-space paper insulation
ТУ 16.К71-310-2001 Flame-retardant cables with low smoke and gas emission
ТУ 16.К73.05-93 660V power and flexible cables
ТУ 16.К76-137-97 РИ-50-17-32 mark radio frequency cables
ТУ 16.К78-03-88 Low-frequency communication cables with cord-paper insulation
ТУ 16.505.305-81 Cables with copper conductors, with insulation from irradiated modified
polyethylene in the PVC sheath
ТУ 16.505.437-82 Mounting wires with fiber of film plastic insulation
ТУ 16.505.451-89 Distributing cables for radio broadcasting
ТУ 16.505.455-73 Wire with PVC insulation and additional fiber insulation, lightened
ТУ 16.505.643-82 High frequency cables
ТУ 16.505.758-75 Symmetrical station inter-cabinet and intra-cabinet cables
ТУ 16-705.141-80 Heating cables with с organic silicon or PVC insulation
Page 200 of 295

ТУ 16.705.450-87 Telephone communication and radiofixation single-pair cables
ТУ 16.705.465-87 Wires and cables for railroad transport and trolleybuses
APPENDIX 5Б
(recommended)
STATION OPERATION CONTROL SYSTEM
1. Designation
1.1. The system constitutes the complete of technical facilities for automated control of
installations and devices providing the normal functioning of the station, including the
passenger service and organization of the train traffic, using the tele-monitoring,
communication, remote control, and control facilities.
1.2. The technical facilities control is executed from the station dispatcher point by the
station duty officer (dispatcher) providing the regulation of the passenger flows and
organization of the train traffic within the station, situation control, control of conditions of
the premises and installations located at the station and in the adjacent main line tunnels.
2. Functions, location of devices, requirements to premises
2.1. The SOCS should provide execution of the following functions:
- organization of the passenger flows and operative control of the station operation using
the tele-monitoring, communication and loud-speaking annunciation facilities;
- stop and control of the escalators’ activities;
- control of the ventilation, heating and water supply installations;
- control of the water drainage and sewerage installations’ activities;
- control of the lighting groups of the station and main line tunnels;
- control of the stairs electrical heating networks of the staircases to the under-street
crossings at the entrances to the underground vestibules of station with gridiron;
- operation of the installations of tunnel passage control;
- signalization of the situation in the controlled and monitored objects;
- control of the of the situation in the premises by the fire and security alarm installations.
2.2. The SOCS facilities should be located in the premises of:
- station dispatcher point (SDP);
- station duty officer (SDO);
- equipment room, switch room, radio center, etc;
- ventilation and pumping plants.
In the SDP premises should be located:
- automated working place of the station dispatcher (AWP SDP);
- automated working place of the duty officer on the station ES post (AWPES) at the
station with gridiron;
- fire and security alarm installations instrumentation;
- alarm activation facilities;
- communication and loud-speaking annunciation facilities;
- video control devices;
- digital electric clock with second or five-second interval timing;
- ventilation and pumping plants control panel;
- contact network breakers control panel (at the station with gridiron).
In the SDO premises the communication and loud-speaking annunciation facilities by
separate assignment should be located.
The approximate scheme of location of equipment in the SDP and SDO premises is
represented in the Figure 1.
2.3. The SDP premises should meet the following requirements:
- SDP premises should be adjacent and should be located at the platform level in the
closest proximity to it;
- SDP at the stations with gridiron should be located on the side of gridiron, and additional
Page 201 of 295

premises or the station duty officer booth – at the platform level on the opposite relating to the
SDP side of station;
- the premises should meet the requirements to the technical aesthetics, should have the
noise absorbing decoration, working and emergency lighting, ventilation, and air
conditioning.
The SDP premises should have additional 1200 mm width door for mounting of
equipment.

Relay EMI

EC operator*

Eating room

Station
dispatcher

EMI console

Station duty
officer

To the platform

1 – secondary electric clock; 2 - subscriber's communication station; 3 – communication console; 4 - additional
communication console; 5 – loud-speaking annunciation commutator; 6 – alarm activation facility; 7 - loudspeaking annunciation console; 8 – VCD control point; 9 – SOCS console; 10 – VCD stand; 11 - AWPES
facilities; 12 – clock board; 13 – contact network breakers control point ; 14 – fire and security alarm
installations instrumentation
*
AT the intermediate stations this equipment is not installed. There is no operator working place.
**
Depending on the type of selected equipment it is possible to make installation on the dispatcher table.

Figure 1. – Scheme of equipment location in the SDP premises of the station with gridiron
3. Tele-monitoring, communication
3.1. The tele-monitoring areas at the station should be accepted according to the clause
5.13.
3.2. Each telecamera should be connected with its corresponding VCD. It is allowed to
connect several telecameras (except for the telecameras at the escalator sites) to one VCD.
Location of the VCD at the separate stand should correspond to situation of the monitored
areas in the station plane, and should provide visibility of all VCD from the dispatcher
working place.
3.3. Telecameras should provide transmission of the pictures with accuracy no less than
460 lines at the illuminance level of the monitored areas no less than the value stipulated for
applied television installations. Herewith the effect of the light sources on the deterioration of
the picture quality of VCD should be minimal.
3.4. Location of telecameras at the upper and lower sites of escalators should provide the
review of combplates of all escalators simultaneously.
At the passenger platforms the telecameras should be installed by one axis at the distance
of 100 - 150 mm from the platform edge, and on the height no less than 2200 mm. Herewith
the visibility of the train route number should be provided.
Page 202 of 295

3.5. The telecameras should be installed at the structures providing the regulation and firm
fixing of the telecameras position.
Fastening of the structure and ring should be rated on the 1500N load.
3.6. In the SDP the communication types according to the Appendix 5.13А should be
provided.
4. Escalators
4.1. The following should be provided at the SOCS console:
- emergency stop of escalators;
- signalization of the escalators operation;
- light (flashing) and sound alarm of the escalator stop.
4.2. Connection of instrumentation for realization of functions indicated in the clause 4.1
should be executed according to the escalators’ control electrical circuit layout developed by
(or coordinated with) the escalators vendor.
4.3. The circuits of stop and signalization of escalators should be allocated at the SOCS
console as the separate functional facilities, and should have independent communication
channels with escalators control circuits.
5. Electromechanical installations
Operation and control of the local and tunnel ventilation installations, pumping plants,
warm air curtains, shut-off fittings, etc, should be provided from the EMI console in the
volume of requirements represented in the section 5.11 of the SP 32-108.
6. Lighting, electrical heating of staircases
The following should be provided from the AWP SDP:
- remote control of the lighting groups of passenger premises, ventilation-and-cable ducts
and areas of the contact rails location under the passenger platform screen, light indicators
(including the route indicators) and «М» symbols;
- remote control of the lighting groups of main line tunnels and centralized switching-off
the working lighting groups of the main line tunnels for the light signaling;
- remote control of the staircases electrical heating networks and under-street crossings, or
corridors at the entrances to the underground station vestibules.
7. Electrical centralization of points and signals
Control of points and signals and control of the train traffic within the station and at the
sections of approach and departure should be provided from the AWP EC in correspondence
with the approved « diagrammatic plan of tracks and schedule of interrelation of points,
signals, and routes».
8. Fire and security alarm
8.1. The SDP premises accommodate the receiving instrumentation of the automatic
firefighting and fire alarm systems, as well as security alarm of equipped with these systems
premises, according to the clauses 5.16 and 5.22.
8.2. The stations should be equipped with control facilities of the personnel and passengers
passage to the tunnel (PTCF) and doors with electric locks at the service bridges of the
passage to the tunnels. The control of the electric locks and signalization of the PTCF
activation should be provided at the AWP SDP.
9. Consoles
9.1. The consoles should consist of the typical structural elements.
9.2. Location of the station gridiron schemes and control objects at the consoles should be
executed by the functional areas and should coincide with their real mutual location.
9.3. The communication consoles should be located at the side-table pedestals attachable to
the AWP tables.
10. Electric power supply
The SOCS installations are related to the electrical receivers of special group of the 1st
category.
Page 203 of 295

APPENDIX 5.10А
(recommended)
TRANSFORMERS POWER CALCULATION METHOD
The power of transformers for the electromechanical installations power supply (power
transformer) and transformers for the lighting networks and other consumers power supply
(lighting transformer) should be defined on the base of results of calculation of the total power
of electrical receivers connected to the SB1 and SB2 of the TSS and SS substations,
correspondingly.
The calculations should be executed in the table form with distribution of the electrical
receivers by the groups taking into consideration their characteristics and operating modes
indicated below.
1. Calculation of capacity of electrical receivers connected to the SB1
1.1. The calculation results should be reflected in the Table 1.
1.2. The design power of escalators should be defined on the base of number of escalators
operating in the peak hours upward with passengers and downward without passengers,
depending on the height of lifting according to the Appendix 5.10B.
The average value of the design power factor cos ϕ at the moving upward should be
accepted to be equal to 0,82, at the moving downward - 0,2.
N o t e – it is recommended not to consider the input to network from the electrical drive of the escalator at
the moving downward in calculations, as in this case the total design power will be lower.

1.3. The design power of the electric receivers of the ventilation and pumping plants
should be defined by the formulas:
Рр = Кз ⋅ Рн;
Qp = Pp ⋅ tg ϕ,
where Рр is the active design power, KW;
Рн is the installed (rated) power, KW;
Кз is the loading factor;
Qp is the design reactive power, KV·Ар;
tg ϕ corresponds to the cos ϕ value for the calculated electrical receiver.
The recommended average values of cos ϕ for different consumer groups are represented
in the Table 1.
The number of electrical receivers, their installed (rated) power and loading factors should
be accepted according to the project data, or on the base of assignments of the corresponding
installations’ developers. The power of reserve aggregates should not be considered in the
calculations.
1.4. The design active and reactive power of the uniform by the operating mode installation
groups should be defined as the sum of Рр and Qp values for the each electrical receiver.
To define the design power of SB1 the ΣРр and ΣQp values should be multiplied by their
operation coincidence factor - Кор.
It is recommended to accept the Кор values taking into consideration the following
suppositions:
- the ventilation installations should be related to the consumers with continuous schedule
of work. On the base of operating data the design Кор factor for the tunnel ventilation
installations should be equal 0,8, and for the local ventilation installations - 0,4;
- the pumping plants should be related to the consumers with periodical schedule of work,
their Кор factor should be within the range 0,12 - 0,5. At the definition of the design power the
Кор factor should be accepted within the indicated range depending on the supposed mode of
their operation. In case there are no data regarding the Кор factor it should be accepted as 0,5;
- the electrical heating devices should be related to the consumers with periodical schedule
of work, their Кор factor should be accepted equal to 0,5. In case of application of electrical
heating of staircases by the electric cables or other devices the Кор factor for them should be
Page 204 of 295

no less than 0,8;
- for other installations not having the defined operating modes the Кор factor should be
accepted to be equal to 0,3.
1.5. The design power of electrical receivers connected to the SB1 should be defined by the
formula:
S p = (∑ Pp ) + (∑ Qp ) .
2. Calculation of capacity of electrical receivers connected to the SB2
2.1. The calculation results should be reflected in the table 2.
2.2. The design power of the lighting installations should be defined as the sum of design
power of LI of the working and emergency lighting of the station, adjacent sections of tunnels
and near-tunnel structures, as well as other electrical receivers connected to the SB2.
The design active and reactive power of the LI should be defined as the sum of Рр and Qр
values of the separate lighting installations; Qр = Ррtg ϕ, tg ϕ corresponds to the capacity
factor cos ϕ of the lighting installation.
At the definition of the design load of the tunnel lighting the LI of the working and
emergency lighting should be considered.
The design power of the other electrical receivers should be defined according to the clause
1.3.
To define the design power of SB2 the Для ΣРр and ΣQр values for LI should be multiplied
by the coincidence factor Кор equal to 0,9; for the other electrical receivers Кор should be
accepted to be equal to 0,5.
2.3. The total design power of the electrical receivers connected to the SB2 should be
defined by the formula:
2

2

S p = (∑ Pp ) + (∑ Qp ) .
3. Transformer power calculation
3.1. The transformers power should be defined on the base of Sр power taking into
consideration the clause 5.10.2.6.
The calculation results should be reflected in the Table 3.
Table1
2

2

Design power
active, KW
Other
escalators
consumers

Name

Power, KW

Кор

cos ϕ

Escalators:
Operation upward
Operation downward
Tunnel ventilation, WAC

-

-

0,82
0,2

Totally
Local ventilation

0,8

0,9

-

Totally
Pumping plants

0,4

0,8

-

0,12 - 0,5

0,9

-

0,5

1,0

-

Totally
Electrical heating devices

Totally

tg ϕ

reactive,
KV⋅Ар

-

Page 205 of 295

Name

Power, KW

Кор

cos ϕ

0,3

0,8

tg ϕ

Design power
active, KW
Other
escalators
consumers

reactive,
KV⋅Ар

Others

Totally
Totally active and reactive power
Totally full power, KV⋅А

ΣРр =

ΣQp =
Sp =

Table 2
Name

Power, KW
Working
Emergency
Lighting
Lighting

Кор

cos ϕ

tg ϕ

Design power
Reactive,
Active, KW
KV⋅Ар

Lighting:
tunnels

Near-tunnel structures

Dead ends
station:
Passenger premises

Production and domestic premises

Substation
Totally for lighting
Other electrical receivers

0,9

Totally
Totally active and reactive power
Totally full power, KV⋅А

0,5
ΣРр =

ΣQp =
Sp =

Table 3
Design power Sр, KV⋅А

Type

Selected transformer
Power Sтр, KV⋅А

Overload, %

Signatures:
Head of the subdivision __________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Executor

__________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Page 206 of 295

APPENDIX 5.10B
(recommended)
DESIGN PARAMETERS OF ELECTRIC DRIVES OF ESCALATORS
Name

Unit
of
meas.
m

Type and technical characteristics of escalator
0,5

Е900Т, escalator moving speed, m/s
0,65
0,5
0,65
0,5
0,65
2,5 - 4
4-6
6 - 9,6

Е25Т

Е40Т

Е55Т

Е75Т

Height of
3,2 - 12 12,2 - 25
25 - 40
35 - 45
45 - 55
55 - 65
65 - 75
lifting
Type of
- 5AP160S8 5AP160S6 5АР160М8 5АР160М6 5А200М8 5А200М6 5А200Л6 5А250М6 АИНКЭМ315Е АИНКЭМ355S АИНКЭМ355А8 АИНКЭМ355В8К АИНКЭМ355А6
drive
Rated power KW
7,5
11
11
15
18,5
22
30
55
90
110
132
160
200
0,73
0,81
0,73
0,82
0,84
0,84
0,84
0,83
0,83
0,84
0,85
0,83
0,84
Rated Cos ϕ In-rush
А
86
134
137
180
200
238
405
660
540
645
705
970
980
starting
current
maximal
Drive power KW
Number of table
consumption
1 – at the speed 0,5 m/s; 2 - 0,65 m/s
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(Р),
generating
(minus Р)
depending
on the
design
operating
mode and
height of
lifting or
descent - Р
= f(Н)

In connection with the constant modernization of the escalator it is advisably to use the data Р = f(Н) in the assignment on the power supply of
escalators supplied for the construction objects

Page 207 of 295

T a b l e 1 - Escalator Е900Т (2,5 - 9,6 m), escalator moving speed 0,5 m/s
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

2,5

3,5

4,5

5,6
-2,2

7,4
-3,0

9,2
-3,7

Height H, m
5,5
6,5
Load Р, KW
11,0
12,8
-4,5
-5,2
3,8

7,5

8,5

9,6

14,6
-6,0

16,5
-6,8

18,4
-7,5

7,5

8,5

9,6

18,0
-8,1

20,1
-9,0

22,0
-10,0

T a b l e 2 - Escalator Е900Т (2,5 - 9,6 m), escalator moving speed 0,65 m/s
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

2,5

3,5

4,5

7,6
-3,2

9,7
-4,2

11,8
-5,1

Height Н, m
5,5
6,5
Load Р, KW
13,8
15,9
-6,1
-7,1
5,0

T a b l e 3 - Escalator Е25Т (3,2 - 12 m)
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

3,2

4

5

6

17,9
4,9

19,6
3,4

21,6
1,8

23,7
0,3

Height Н, m
7
8
Load Р, KW
25,7 27,8
-1,3
-2,8
9,0

9

10

11

12

29,9
-4,3

31,9
-5,9

34,0
-7,4

36,0
-9,0

T a b l e 4 - Escalator Е25Т (12 - 25 m)
Height Н, m
18 19 20 21 22 23 24
25
Load Р, KW
Lifting with load
30,0 31,6 33,2 34,8 36,4 38,0 39,6 41,2 42,8 44,4 46,0 47,6 49,2 51,0
Descent with load
-5,0 -6,3 -7,6 -8,9 -10,2 -11,5 -12,8 -14,1 -15,4 -16,7 -18,0 -19,3 -20,6 -22,0
Lifting and descent without load
9,0
Operating mode

12

13

14

15

16

17

T a b l e 5 - Escalator Е40Т (25 - 40 m)
Height Н, m
32 33 34 35 36 37
38
39 40
Load Р, KW
Lifting with load
63,0 65,2 67,4 69,6 71,8 74,0 76,2 78,4 80,6 82,8 85,0 87,2 89,4 91,6 93,8 96,0
Descent with load
-26,0 -27,3 -28,7 -30,0 -31,3 -32,7 -34,0 -35,3 -36,6 -38,0 -39,3 -40,6 -42,0 -043,3 -44,6 -46,0
Lifting and descent without
9,0
load
Operating mode

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

T a b l e 6 - Escalator Е55Т (35 - 45 m)
Height Н, m
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
Load Р, KW
96,0 98,2 100,4 102,6 104,8 107,0 109,2 111,4 113,6 115,8 118
-59,0 -60,7 -62,4 -64,1 -65,8 -67,5 -69,2 -70,9 -72,6 -74,3 -76,0
9,0

Operating mode

35

Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

36

37

38

T a b l e 7 - Е55Т (45 - 55 m)
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

Height Н, m
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Load Р, KW
122,0 124,4 126,8 129,2 131,6 134,0 136,4 138,8 141,2 143,6 146
-64,0 -65,9 -67,8 -69,7 -71,6 -73,5 -75,4 -77,3 -79,2 -81,1 -83,0
14,0
45

46

47

48

T a b l e 8 - Е75Т (55 - 65 m)
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

Height Н, m
60
61
62
63
64
65
Load Р, KW
150,0 152,3 154,6 156,9 159,2 161,6 163,8 166,18 168,4 170,7 173,0
-66,0 -67,7 -69,4 -71,1 -72,8 -74,5 -76,2 -77,9 -79,6 -81,3 -83,0
27,0
55

56

57

58

59

Page 208 of 295

T a b l e 9 - Е75Т (65 - 75 m)
Operating mode
Lifting with load
Descent with load
Lifting and descent without load

Height Н, m
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
Load Р, KW
187 190 193 196 199 202 205 208 211 214 217
-79,0 -80,7 -82,4 -84,1 -85,8 -87,5 -89,2 -90,9 -92,6 -94,3 -96,0
28,0
65

66

67

68

APPENDIX 5.10C
(rexommended)
STATION PASSENGER PREMISES LIGHTING INSTALLATIONS CALCULATION
METHOD
The formalized method of calculation of LI is designated for calculation of the necessary
number of LI elements at the unknown light intensity curve of the lamp. The calculated
values of the utilization factor consider the multiple reflections and differentiation by the
weighted average values of the reflection index of premises.
The given method allows executing of the direct and inverse tasks of the LI calculation
(definition of the average illuminance or necessary number of lamps).
The LI calculation should be executed in the following consequence:
1. On the base of plane and cross-sectional drawing of the premises the premises index
should be calculated:
i = b / 2hp,
where i is the premises index;
b is the width of premises, m;
hp is the design height, m.
The design height hр should be accepted for the following LI elements:
а) direct light (light distribution class - П, share of the light flux from the lamp directed to
the lower hemisphere is more than 80 %) - h;
N o t e – The light distribution class should be defined taking into consideration the architecture of the station
on the base of supposed ratio of the light fluxes re-distributing by the LI elements to the upper and lower parts of
premises.

b) preferably direct light (light distribution class - Н, share of the light flux from the lamp
directed to the lower hemisphere is 60 - 80 %) - 5h + 3h0 / 8;
c) evenly distributed light (light distribution class - Р, share of the light flux from the lamp
directed to the lower hemisphere is 40 - 60 %) - h + h0 / 2;
d) preferably reflected light (light distribution class - В, share of the light flux from the
lamp directed to the lower hemisphere is 20 - 40 %) - 3h + 5h0 / 8;
- reflected light (light distribution class - О, share of the light flux from the lamp directed
to the lower hemisphere is 20 % and less) - h0;
where h is the height of location of lamps over the calculated surface;
h0 is the height of the ceiling over the calculated surface.
2. in correspondence with the accepted decoration materials the reflection indices of the
ceiling ρпот, walls ρст and floor ρпол surfaces (Recommendations [10]) are defined, and the
weighted average value of reflection index of the premises surface ρср.вз is calculated:
S ρ + Sст ρ ст + S полρ пол
ρ ср.вз = пот пот
,
Sпот + Sст + S пол
where Sпот, Sст, Sпол are the areas of ceiling, walls, and floor;
ρпот, ρст, ρпол are the reflection indices of ceiling, walls, and floor.
3. By the calculated values of the premises index i and weighted average value of the ρср.вз
factor for the selected light distribution class of the lighting installation element the utilization
factor и is calculated:
и = kic,
where i is the premises index;
Page 209 of 295

k, c are the factors defined formally through the weighted average value of reflection
index.
The k, с factors for LI are calculated:
а) direct light - П
kп.с = 0,428ρ 0,177
ср.вз
− 0 , 738
сп.с = 0,097 kп.с

b) preferably direct light - Н
kп.п.с = 0,395ρ 0,452
ср.вз
− 0 , 738
сп.п.с = 0,188kп.п.с

c) evenly distributed light - Р
k р.с = 0,480ρ 0,493
ср.вз
− 0,573
ср.с = 0,286k р.с

d) preferably reflected light - В
k п.о.с = 0,415ρ 0,446
ср.вз
− 0,556
сп.о.с = 0,290k п.о.с

e) reflected light - О
k о.с = 0,415ρ 0,556
ср.вз
− 0 , 394
со.с = 0,290k о.с
4. By the utilization factor method the necessary light flux Ф of the LI element is
calculated:
Е SK
Ф = ср з
Nu
Or, at the known light flux of the light sources, the necessary number of LI elements N is
calculated by the formula
E SK
Е zSK з
N = ср з = нор
,
Фи
Фи
where Еср is the average horizontal illuminance;
Енор is the critical (minimal) horizontal illuminance;
S is the area of the illuminated surface;
Кз is the factor of safety;
z is the irregularity ratio.

Page 210 of 295

APPENDIX 5.13А
(recommended)
TYPES AND SUBSCRIBERS OF THE OPERATIVE-TECHNOLOGICAL COMMUNICATIONS
Communication types
Subscriber name
TTDP
PSDP
EDP
EMDP
LDP operator
PDP
FSDP
CC LDP equipment
room
LDP
equipment
rooms
SDP-AWP ДО
SDP-AWP EC
SDP
EMS relay room
SDO booth at the
station platform
Police post
Machinist
of
escalators
Post near the lower
sites of escalators
The same, near the
upper sites
Escalator tunnel
Tension chamber
ACP booth
Medical center
Cash room

Dispatcher

Service

Т

TTDC PSDC EDC EMDC TTTC PSTC ETC EMTC
*
*
*
*
*

О PC FSC IDC АТС ARDC S PSC E TTC DС
+
+
+
+
*
+
+

+
+
+
+
*
*

*
*
+
+
+

+

+

*

*

+

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+
+
+
+
+
+

+
+

+

+
+
+

LoudEC speaking TO А D WS M
PС LP
PAS LSC
+
* *
*
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Local

+
*
+
+

*
+

+

+
+
+

*
*
*

+
+
+

*

+
+

+
+

+
+
+

+

+
+
+

+

+
+

*

+

+
+

+

+

*

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+
+
+

+
+
+

*
+
+

+
+

+
+
+
+
Page 211 of 295

Communication types
Subscriber name
TTC equipment room
TSS, SS
Drainage plant main,
transit
TVI
Station
sewerage
installation
The same, tunnel
» at the station tracks
Line drivers change
point
Rolling stocks TMP
Platform in the train
head
The same, in the train
tail
Radio center
Switch room
SDO of interchange
station
Ticket hall
Service
premises
corridors
Platforms and middle
hall of station
Pedestrian crossings
TTC mechanic
Station master
Equipment room of
TTC of adjacent
station
Entrance to station.
Street area

Dispatcher

Service

Т

О PC FSC IDC АТС ARDC S PSC E TTC DС

TTDC PSDC EDC EMDC TTTC PSTC ETC EMTC
+
+
+
+
+

+
+

+

+
+

+
+

+

+
+
+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+

*

+
+

LoudEC speaking TO А D WS M
PС LP
PAS LSC
+
+
+
+
+
+
Local

+

+
+

+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+
+
+

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+
+

+

+

+

+
+
+

+
+

+

+
*

+

+
+

+

+

Page 212 of 295

Communication types
Subscriber name
Contact
network
switch post
Run traffic lights
Entrances to the
near-tunnel structures
Main line, tunnel,
and station tracks
Track
switches,
switchman booth
Signal points at the
run and station
Station
track
platform, head
The same, end
TMP DP 1,2
Depot duty officer
Senior fare collectors
Parking tracks
Accident
recovery
formations
of
services
Subdivisions of the
Underground
Railroad

Dispatcher

Service

Т

О PC FSC IDC АТС ARDC S PSC E TTC DС

TTDC PSDC EDC EMDC TTTC PSTC ETC EMTC
+
+
+

+

+

+

LoudEC speaking TO А D WS M
PС LP
PAS LSC
+
Local

+
+
+

+

+

+

+

+
+
+
+
+

+
+

By separate assignment of the customer

Page 213 of 295

TYPES AND SUBSCRIBERS OF URBAN AND RADIO COMMUNICATION
Subscriber name

Communication types
Urban
Radio communication
CRN ECHT TRC
SRC RORC
+
*
*
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

CTC
1. TTDP
+
2. PSDP
+
3. EDP
+
4. EMDP
+
5. Municipal power supply system dispatcher point
6. Train driver cabin
7. Radio center
8. Switch room
+
9. Automatic telephones
+
10. Parking track workers
+
R e f e r e n c e d e s i g n a t i o n s : * - console (commutator), + - subscriber’s (end) device.
А - Communication of the AFPS administration with senior fare collectors;
D - Communication of TTDP with accident recovery formations of services;
M - Communication of conference of the Underground Railroad management with structural subdivisions;
ECHT - Communication of the PSDP with municipal power supply organizations;
DС - Communication of the station master;
FSDP – fire safety dispatcher point;
PDP – police dispatcher point;
SDO – station duty officer.

APPENDIX 5.14А
(recommended)
COMPOSITION, NUMBER, AND NORMS OF FORMATION OF SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision
Traffic service
Traffic distance – station team
Escalator service
Escalator distance:
Escalator team
Telecontrol team
Power supply service
Power supply distance:
Substations group
Cable network section
Distance of station and tunnel lighting:
Section of station and tunnel lighting
Distance of station lighting:
Station lighting section
Distance of tunnel lighting:
Tunnel lighting section
Signalization and communication service
Signalization distance:
Train traffic section
Automated driving section
Hot boxes detector section
Communication distance:
Communication section
Radio section
Station automation section (ACP, AFPS LB)
SOCS section
Fire alarm section
Track service
Track distance – track division
Tunnel structures service
Structures distance – structure division

Number of
personnel, man

Norm of formation

See note 1

Station

9
3

Machine room
14 machine rooms

9
14
See note 2
9
See note 2
6
See note 2
7

6 substations
15 km of line
5 stations and runs
5 stations
13 - 15 km of line

6
9
6

Station with gridiron
15 km of line
One per distance

6
6
6
6
6

15 km of line
The same
»
»
»

22

6 km of line

28

6 km of line
Page 214 of 295

Subdivision

Number of
personnel, man

Norm of formation

Electromechanical service
Sanitary engineering distance:
Sanitary engineering section
10
6 km of line
Protection group
7
The same
Closing mechanisms team
6
12 km of line
Electrical protection and ATU distance: SCP, LCP group
6
The same
Rolling stock service
Electric depot:
Line drivers change point
9
Station - 1 startup line section
Rolling stocks TMP
14
20 km of line (see clause. 3.3)
Revenue collection service
Revenue collection distance – cash section
See note 3
station
Notes
1. Number of personnel and composition of the station team should be defined according to the Appendix
5.14.B depending on the number of vestibules, machine rooms of escalators and availability of gridiron.
2. At the length of the Underground Railroad network up to 200 km the common distance of station и tunnel
lighting should be accepted, more than 200 km – different distances of the station и tunnel lighting.
3. Number of personnel of the cash section should be defined according to the Appendix 5.14.B depending
on the number of vestibules taking into consideration one foreman or charwoman of production premises per
five cash sections.

APPENDIX 5.14А
(recommended)
COMPOSITION, NUMBER, AND NORMS OF FORMATION OF SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision
Traffic service
Traffic distance – station team
Escalator service
Escalator distance:
Escalator team
Telecontrol team
Power supply service
Power supply distance:
Substations group
Cable network section
Distance of station and tunnel lighting:
Section of station and tunnel lighting
Distance of station lighting:
Station lighting section
Distance of tunnel lighting:
Tunnel lighting section
Signalization and communication service
Signalization distance:
Train traffic section
Automated driving section
Hot boxes detector section
Communication distance:
Communication section
Radio section
Station automation section (ACP, AFPS LB)
SOCS section
Fire alarm section
Track service
Track distance – track division
Tunnel structures service
Structures distance – structure division
Electromechanical service

Number of
personnel, man

Norm of formation

See note 1

Station

9
3

Machine room
14 machine rooms

9
14
See note 2
9
See note 2
6
See note 2
7

6 substations
15 km of line
5 stations and runs
5 stations
13 - 15 km of line

6
9
6

Station with gridiron
15 km of line
One per distance

6
6
6
6
6

15 km of line
The same
»
»
»

22

6 km of line

28

6 km of line

Page 215 of 295

Number of
personnel, man

Subdivision

Norm of formation

Sanitary engineering distance:
Sanitary engineering section
10
6 km of line
Protection group
7
The same
Closing mechanisms team
6
12 km of line
Electrical protection and ATU distance: SCP, LCP group
6
The same
Rolling stock service
Electric depot:
Line drivers change point
9
Station - 1 startup line section
Rolling stocks TMP
14
20 km of line (see clause. 3.3)
Revenue collection service
Revenue collection distance – cash section
See note 3
station
Notes
1. Number of personnel and composition of the station team should be defined according to the Appendix
5.14.B depending on the number of vestibules, machine rooms of escalators and availability of gridiron.
2. At the length of the Underground Railroad network up to 200 km the common distance of station и tunnel
lighting should be accepted, more than 200 km – different distances of the station и tunnel lighting.
3. Number of personnel of the cash section should be defined according to the Appendix 5.14.B depending
on the number of vestibules taking into consideration one foreman or charwoman of production premises per
five cash sections.

APPENDIX 5.14B
(recommended)
OPERATION SUBDIVISIONS PERSONNEL SPECIALTIES. PRODUCTION
PROCESS GROUPS. SCHEDULES OF WORKS
Subdivision, personnel specialty
Traffic distance
Station team:
Station master
Station duty officer

Number of
Production process
personnel, man
groups according
to the SNiP
Including
Totally
2.09.04
women

Daily schedule of
work

1
4

1
4

1а
1а

Duty officer on arrival and departure of trains
(at the station with gridiron)
Duty officer of the centralization post (at the
station with gridiron)
Centralization post operator
Automated control point inspector (in the
vestibule)
Duty officer near escalators (per machine
room)

4

4

1а

8.00 - 17.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
The same

4

4

1а

»

4
4

4
3

1а
1а

»
»

3

2

1а

Cleaning machines driver (per two vestibules)

12

10

1b

6.30 - 15.30
15.30 - 23.30
I and II shifts
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour

4

1

1b

4
1

1
-

1b
1b

8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
The same
8.00 - 17.00

3

-

1b

8.00 - 17.00

1а

8.00 - 17.00 or 0.00 -

Escalator distance
Escalator team:
Machinist

Machinist assistant
Foreman
Telecontrol team:
Electrician
Power supply distance
Substation group:
chief

1

Page 216 of 295

Subdivision, personnel specialty

Number of
Production process
personnel, man
groups according
to the SNiP
Including
Totally
2.09.04
women

Daily schedule of
work

1b
1b
1b

7.00
The same
»
»

1b
1b
1b
1а

»
»
»
»

3
2
1

1b
1b
1b
1b

»
»
»
»

1
1
3
1

1
1

1а
1b
1b
1b

»
»
»

1

-

1а

2
3
1

1
1

1b
1b
1b

6
1

-

1а

electrician

4

-

1b

wireman

1

-

1b

Automated driving section:
senior electrician
electrician

9
1
4

3
-

1а
1b

wireman
Hot boxex detection section:
senior electrician

4
6
1

3
-

1b

electrician

4

-

1b

wireman

1

-

1b

6
1
4

-

1а
1b

electrician
wireman
cleanup man
Cable network section:
electrician
wireman
cleanup man
senior electrician (per two sections)
Station и tunnel lighting distance
Station и tunnel lighting section:
electrician
wireman
senior electrician (per three sections)
cleanup man
Stations lighting distance
Station lighting section:
senior electrician
electrician
wireman
cleanup man
Tunnel lighting distance
Tunnel lighting section:
senior electrician

3
4
1
14
1
11
1
1

2
1
6
5
1

9
1
6
1
1

electrician
wireman
cleanup man
Signalization distance
TTC section:
senior electrician

Communication distance
Communication section:
senior electrician
electrician

1а

8.00 - 17.00 or 0.00 7.00
The same
»
»

8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00
The same
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
То же
8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00

The same
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
Page 217 of 295

Subdivision, personnel specialty
wireman
Radio section:
senior electrician
electrician

wireman
Station automation section (ACP, AFPS LB):
senior electrician
electrician

wireman
SOCS section:
wireman

Fire alarm section:
senior electrician
electrician

wireman
Track distance
Track division:
Track foreman
Foreman assistant
Track and contact rail serviceman
(unabsolved foreman)
Track and contact rail serviceman
Track patrolman
Structures distance
Structures division:
Tunnel foreman
Tunnel foreman assistant
Artificial structures patrolman
Drainage worker
Tunnel worker
Facer
Colourer
Plasterer
Breakdown mechanic
Sanitary engineering distance
Sanitary engineering section:
electrician
electrical fitter

Protection group:
senior electrician
electrician

Number of
Production process
personnel, man
groups according
Daily schedule of
work
to the SNiP
Including
Totally
2.09.04
women
1
1b
8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00
6
1
1а
The same
4
1b
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
1
1b
8.00 - 17.00 or 23.00 8.00
6
1
1а
8.00 - 17.00 or 14.00 23.00
4
1b
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
1
1b
8.00 - 17.00 или 14.00
- 23.00
6
6
1b
8.00 - 20.00, 20.00 8.00 Twenty-fourhour
6
1
1а
8.00 - 17.00 or 14.00 23.00
4
1b
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
1
1b
8.00 - 17.00 or 14.00 23.00
22
1
1

6
-

1b
1b
1b

0.00 - 6.00
The same
»

14
4

2
4

1b
1b

»
»

22
1
2
1
8
6
2
3
1
4

16
1
8
3
2
2
-

1b
1b
1b
2в
1b
1b
2c
2c
1b

»
»
»
»
»
»
»
»
»

10
2
8

2
2

1b
2c

8.00 - 17.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour

7
1
1

1
-

1а
1b

8.00 - 17.00
The same
Page 218 of 295

Subdivision, personnel specialty
electrical fitter

Number of
Production process
personnel, man
groups according
to the SNiP
Including
Totally
2.09.04
women
5
1
1b

Daily schedule of
work
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour

Closing mechanisms team:
electrician
electrical fitter

6
1
5

1
1

1b
1b

8.00 - 17.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour

Electrical protection and ATU distance:
SCP and LCP group:
electrician
electrical fitter

6
1
5

1
1

1а
1b

8.00 - 17.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour

Electric depot
Line drivers change point:
driver-instructor

9
4

4
-

1а

4

3

1а

1
14
2

1
4
-

1а

9.00 - 17.00
17.00 - 2.00
4.50 - 9.00
8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
8.00 - 17.00

1b

2
3

-

1b
1b

3
3
1

3
1

1b
1b
1а

7.00 - 15.00
15.00 - 23.00
The same
7.00 - 15.00
15.00 - 23.00
The same
»
8.00 - 17.00

1

1

1а

8.00 - 17.00

4

4

1а

8.00 - 20.00
20.00 - 8.00
Twenty-four-hour
The same

operator

service premises cleanup man
Rolling stocks TMP on line:
foreman
Team foreman
senior car inspector
car inspector
car repair fitter
cleanup man premises
Revenue collection distance
Cash sections foreman
Cash section:
senior fare collector (per one station)

Shift fare collector (per station with two
4
4
1а
vestibules)
Fare collector (according the number of cash
3
3
1а
7.00 - 15.00
windows)
15.00 - 23.00
Notes
1. For the station team and cash section personnel the number of wardrobe lockers should be calculated with
10 % reserve.
2. At the calculation of station personnel number by workers’ shifts by the 8.00 - 20.00 and 20.00 - 8.00
schedules it is allowed to conduct calculation as for personnel working by three shifts per day.

APPENDIX 5.14C
(recommended)
DESOGNATION, AREA, AND DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE,
PRODUCTION AND DOMESTIC PREMISES AT THE STATION
Designation (name) of premises
Traffic service
Station master
Station master stowage

Number of
premises

Area, m2

Disposition

1
1

14
6

In one vestibule
The same
Page 219 of 295

Designation (name) of premises
Police post
Medical center

Station dispatcher point (SDP) with SOCS
system (see Appendix 5.14D)
Stowage of cleaning material and sacks с hard
domestic waste
Stowage of cleaning inventory
Cleaning machines repair and storage
Stowage of means of individual protection of
the station personnel
Premises of fenced placed for floor cleaning
machines, towers
Still room
Track service
Personnel of the track division, road master,
stowage
Stowages of the track and contact rail teams
Stowage of line tools and materials

Number of
premises
1
2

Area, m2

Disposition

10
12 + 8

In the each vestibule
In the vestibule of shallow station, at
the platform level of the deep burial
station
In the production premises block at
the platform level
Near the staircases of the under-street
crossing of one vestibule
In one vestibule
In the each vestibule
Station

According to the
calculation
1
10
1
1
1

10
10 - 15
6

According to the
calculation
1
6

At the platform level
In the each vestibule and at the
platform level

3

15 + 8 + 6

Station

2
1

8+8
15 - 18

»
In correcpondence with the clause
5.7.1.16

1
1
1
1

8
12
15
6

1

8

FLM stowage
Electromechanical service
Electrician, shop and stowage of sanitary
engineering section
Electrician, shop and stowage группы защиты
Electrician, shop and stowage of closing
mechanisms team
Electrician, shop and stowage of SDP and LDP
team
Power supply service
Station lighting section personnel, shop
Tunnel lighting section personnel, shop
Station lighting section stowage
Tunnel lighting section stowage
Stowage for storage of mercury-containing
lamps
Electrician, cable network section shop
Stowage of cable network section
Tunnel structures section
foreman, personnel, and stowage of the tunnel
structures division
Stowage of inert materials

1

6

Near one machine room of escalators
Near the machine room
The same
In the each vestibule and at the level
of ticket hall
In the each vestibule at the level of
machine room
Near the each machine room

3

18 + 15 + 6

Station

3
3

12 + 12 + 6
12 + 12 + 6

»
»

3

12 + 12 + 6

»

2
2
1
1
1

10 + 10
8+8
8 - 10
8 - 10
8

Station
»
»
»
»

2
1

10 + 12
6

At the each station

3

8 + 18 + 6

Station

1

6

Stowage for repair and storage of vestibule
doors
Reserve for temporary repair teams of services

1

10

Near the staircases of the under-street
crossing of one of vestibuleй
In the each vestibule

2

20 + 25

Escalator service
Escalator foreman
Escalator machinist
Shop
Stowage of the escalator handrails and
vulcanization equipment
Stowage of escalator spare parts

In one vestibule with entrance from
the under-street crossing
Page 220 of 295

Designation (name) of premises

Number of
premises

Signalization and communication service
Personnel of radio section, shop, stowage
Personnel of communication section, stowage

3
2

Electrician of station automation section, shop
Hot boxes detection section
TTC section, shop, stowage

2
1
3

Fire alarm section

1

Rolling stocks service
Line drivers change point: instructor premises,
personnel, eating and rest room, wardrobe
TMP of rolling stock on line:
Eating and rest room
Stowage, shop
Operator room
Men’s and women’s wardrobe
Lavatory
Men’s and women’s shower room
Revenue collection service
Section team foreman, stowage
Senior fare collector
Ticket office
Coins calculation
Equipment room (server)
wardrobe
General designation premises
Separate wardrobes for each service, common
shower room (in the sanitary-and-domestic
premises block)*
Lavatories

Area, m2

Disposition

15 + 15 + 10
Station
15 + 6
The same, near the communication
unit
10 + 8
In the vestibule
12
At one end station
15 + 10 + 8 Near the TTC equipment room of the
station with gridiron
8
In the vestibule (in case of
unavailability of above-ground
buildings)

4

20 + 8 + +
10 + 15

At the end station of the first startup
line section

1
1
1
2
1
2

10
15
20
12 + 11
6
3+3

On the 2nd floor
The same
»
»
»
»

2
1
1
1
1
1

9+8
10
8 - 20
12
4
10

In one vestibule
The same
In the each vestibule
The same
»
»

According to the
calculation

In one vestibule of shallow station, in
the each vestibule of deep burial
station
According to the
At the platform level near SDP, in the
calculation
each station vestibule, in TSS and
dead ends
Wardrobes (lockers for clean and special
»
In the personnel premises and in the
clothes)*
sanitary-and-domestic premises block
Special clothes drying room
1
6
In the sanitary-and-domestic
premises block
Stowage of the fuel and lubricating, and
1
20
In the above-ground vestibule or near
painting materials (common) with separating
the underground vestibule with
mesh partitions
entrance from under-street crossing
Eating and rest room
1
18
In one vestibule or at the platform
level
Canteen
According to the design In the vestibule on one station line, as
assignment
a rule, at the station with drivers
change point
*
The wardrobe for electromechanical service should be located near the shower room. Three-compartment
lockers should be provided in the wardrobe.

APPENDIX 5.14D
(recommended)
BLOCK OF PRODUCTION PREMISES AT THE LEVEL OF STATION
PLATFORM. DESIGNATION AND AREA OF PREMISES
Name (designation) of premises
Dispatcher point (SDP):
Dispatcher room
»

Area, m2

Disposition

60
55

At the station with gridiron
The same, without gridiron
Page 221 of 295

Name (designation) of premises
Station duty officer
Eating and rest room
Switch room
Relay room
Switch room
Radio center
Technological systems equipment room
Line switching room (LSR)

Area, m2
15
10
20
30
25 - 30
25 - 27
According to the
calculation
According to the
calculation
12

Disposition
Adjacent to dispatcher room
The same
Length - 7 m
The same
Length - 8 m
The same - 6,5 m
At the each station
At one station of communication section

Lighting switchboard
At the each station
Notes
1. At the stations with gridiron the SDP premises should be located, as a rule, on the side of gridiron.
2. The height of premises should be no less than 2,75 m.

APPENDIX 5.16А
(obligatory)
LIST OF PREMISES AND FACILITIES WITH INDICATION OF CATEGORIES ON
EXPLOSION AND FIRE HAZARD AND CLASSES OF FIRE HAZARDOUS ZONES
Premises*, structures, spatial-and-planning
elements** and zones in structures

Characteristics of substances and
materials***

1. Ground objects
1.1. Premises of production and storage designation in the buildings
Shops
SCM
Material storages
Combustible materials (or non-combustible
materials in flammable packing)
Archives, libraries
SCM
Stowages of combustible materials
SCM
Stowages
SCM
Stowages of FLM and FL
Oils, greases, FL with flash point > 61 °С
Stowages of highly-flammable liquids HFL with flash point > 28 °С
(HFL)
Stowages of HFL
HFL with flash point ≤ 28 °С
Premises of pumping plants
Trace amounts of EIM
Water measuring units
The same
Central heating point
»
Premises with dry transformers
»
The same, with oil transformers
FL
Electrical switching rooms
Trace amounts of SCM, EIM
Tool-grinding sections
Trace amounts of SCM
Instrument distributing sections
The same
Joinery sections
Trace amounts of SCM, FL
Welding sections
Non-combustible substances in hot, redhot, and melted conditions
Forging sections
The same
Electrical welding sections
»
Automation sections
Non-combustible materials
Hydro-dampers repair sections
Trace amounts of FL
Washing-and-greasing sections
Non-combustible substances
Sections of charging of AB with gel
The same
electrolyte
Accumulators repair rooms
»
Electrolyte (acid, alkali) rooms
»
Sections of charging of AB with acid or Emission of hydrogen at the charging
alkali electrolyte
facilities operation

Class of
Category
zone
according to
according
NPB 105
PUE

V2
V1 - V2
V1 - V2
V2
V2
V1
B

P-IIа
P-I - PIIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P1
V-1б

А
V4
D
D
D
V1
V4
V4
V4
V2
G

V-1а
P-IIa
P-1
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
-

G
G
D
V4
D
D

P-IIа
-

D
D
А

В-1а

Page 222 of 295

Premises*, structures, spatial-and-planning
elements** and zones in structures
Distiller room
Oil distributing premises
Equipment sections
Mechanical sections
Fitter sections
Crack detection rooms
Electro-car charging rooms
Charging facilities premises
Electric sections
Painting sections

Class of
Category
zone
according to
according
NPB 105
PUE
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
FL with flash point > 28 °С
B
П-I
EIM, SCM
V2
P-IIа
SCM
DД
Non-combustible substances
D
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
P-IIа
Emission of hydrogen
А (V4)****
B-Ia
Combustible gases, HFL
А (V4)****
B-Ia
SCM, EIM
V2
P-IIа
Application of solvents with flash point <
А
B-Ia
28 °С
The same
А
B-Ia
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
P-IIа
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
The same
D
Trace amounts of SCM, EIM
V4
P-IIа
The same
V4
P-IIа
»
V4
P-IIа
SCM
V2
P-IIа
The same
V3
P-IIa
HFL with flash point < 28 °С
А
V-Ia
B
V-Iб
HFL with flash point ≥ 28 °С
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
P-IIа
The same
V4
P-IIа
Characteristics of substances and
materials***

Car painting shop
Scrubber rooms
Rolling stocks washing chambers
Compressor rooms
Automated driving sections
Radio informers repair sections
Train radio communication sections
Eating rooms
Stowages of dirty and clean clothes
FLM stowages with HFL storage
The same
Stowages of repair section and ASR
Thyristor control sections
1.2. Premises in the above-ground vestibules
Production premises of ticket block
Trace amounts of SCM
Medical centers
Trace amounts of SCM и HFL
Linen rooms
SCM
Special clothes drying rooms
The same
LVI premises
Corresponds to the category of maintained
premises
Heating points, water measuring units
Non-combustible substances and materials
Relay and equipment rooms
EIM
Switch rooms
»
Radio centers
»
Electrical switching rooms
SCM, including the trace amounts of cable
insulation
Stowages
SCM
AFAI premises
Non-combustible substances and materials
Canteens
SCM
Stowages for dirty and clean clothes
»
Archives, libraries
»
1.3. structures
Vestibules with escalators
EIM, SCM
Vestibules without escalators
Non-combustible substances and materials
Ticket halls with escalators
EIM, SCM
Ticket halls without escalators
Non-combustible substances and materials
Galleries of metro-bridges and above
SCM
ground sections
1.4. Zones in structures
Organized commerce zones
Combustible substances and materials
2. Underground objects
2.1. Premises

V4
V2
V2
V2
V2 - V4

P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа

D
V4
V2
V4
V4

P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа

V2
D
V2
V2
V1 - V2

P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-I - PIIа

V3
D
V3
D
V3

P-IIa
P-IIа
P-IIа

V3

P-IIа

Page 223 of 295

Premises*, structures, spatial-and-planning
elements** and zones in structures

Characteristics of substances and
materials***

Class of
Category
zone
according to
according
NPB 105
PUE
V2
P-IIа

Offices of the station masters, senior fare
SCM
collectors, heads of sections, foremen,
machinists of escalators, electricians
Ticket offices
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
Police post premises
The same
V4
Fire safety premises
»
V4
Eating room
»
V4
Medical centers
Trace amounts of SCM, HFL
V2
Rest rooms
SCM
V2
Linen rooms
»
V2
Special clothes drying rooms
»
V2
Wardrobes
»
V2
Lavatories
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
Heating points
The same
D
Station dispatcher points
SCM, EIM
V2
Shower rooms
The same
D
EC posts
EIM
V2
Relay and equipment rooms
»
V2
Communication rooms
»
V2
Switch rooms
»
V2
Electrical switching rooms
»
V4
Radio centers
Trace amounts of SCM, EIM
V4
Rasping stowages
SCM
V3
LVI premises
Corresponds to the category of maintained V2 - V4
premises
LVI premises for the painting materials
The same
А
stowages
The same, for FLM stowages
»
V1
LVI premises for smoke removal
Trace amounts of EIM
V4
Accumulator rooms – AB with acid or Emission of hydrogen at the charging А (V4)****
alkali electrolyte
facilities operation
The same – AB with gel electrolyte
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
Calorifer rooms
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
10KV, 825V SB premises
Trace amounts of SCM, EIM
V4
integrated premises of SB and switch rooms
The same
V4
Pumping plants premises
Trace amounts of EIM
V4
Automation section stowages
SCM
V2
Stowages
SCM
V2
AFFI premises
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
Stowages of painting materials (HFL ) in HFL with flash point 28 °С
А
small unbreakable package
FLM stowages (FL)
FL with flash point > 61 °С
V1
Underground pedestrian crossings, corridors Non-combustible substances and materials
D
between interchange stations
Vestibules without escalators
The same
D
Staircases
»
D
Vestibules with escalators
EIM, SCM, FL
V2
Ticket halls
Trace amounts of SCM
V4
Ticket halls with escalators
SCM, FL, EIM
V2
Entrance halls
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
Distributing halls of stations
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
Interchange corridors
»
D
Escalator tunnels with non-flammable Trace amounts of SCM, EIM, FL
V4
elements of stairs and balustrade of
escalators

P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
V-Ia
P-1
P-IIа
V-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
V-1а
P-I
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа
P-IIа

Page 224 of 295

Premises*, structures, spatial-and-planning
elements** and zones in structures

Characteristics of substances and
materials***

Class of
Category
zone
according to
according
NPB 105
PUE
V2
P-IIа

The same, with flammable elements of
SCM, EIM
stairs and balustrade
Tension rooms of station escalators
SCM
V2
P-IIа
Machine rooms of escalators
Trace amounts of SCM, FL
V2
P-IIа
Under-escalator ventilation-and-cable bays SCM, including the cable insulation
V2
P-IIа
Demounting manways and escalator shafts Non-combustible substances and materials
V4
P-IIа
Under-platform ventilation-and-cable ducts SCM, including the cable insulation
V2
P-IIа
2.2. Structures for traffic (storage) of trains, near-tunnel structures
Main line tunnels
EIM
V3
P-IIа
Connecting track branches
EIM
V3
P-IIа
Dead ends, including the ones with TMP
EIM, SCM
V3
P-IIа
Connecting chambers
EIM
V3
P-IIа
Ventilation cross-passages
Trace amounts of EIM
V4
P-IIа
Ventilation gangways
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
TVI machine rooms
EIM
V4
P-IIа
Shafts and ventilation tunnels
EIM
V4
P-IIа
Bypass facilities (channels)
EIM
V4
P-IIа
Manways to the pumping plants
Non-combustible substances and materials
D
Bypass cable ducts
SCM, EIM
V2 - V4
P-IIа
2.3. zones in structures
Organized commerce zones
Combustible substances and materials, FL
V2
P-IIа
Zones in passengers premises with floor
SCM
V3
P-IIа
escalators with flammable elements of stairs
and balustrade
The same, with non-flammable elements of Trace amounts of SCM
V4
P-IIа
stairs and balustrade
Zones of night storage of rolling stocks on
SCM, EIM
V3
P-IIа
the station tracks
*
Premises is the space inside the building (structure), having the specific functional designation and
restricted by construction structures.
**
Spatial-and-planning element is the part of structure the specific functional designation, no separated from
the adjacent facilities by the construction structures.
***
Data on the substances and materials included in the composition of the fire load: SCM - solid
combustible materials (including the fiber and loosen); EIM – electro-insulating materials of cables and
electrical equipment; FL – flammable liquids; HFL - highly flammable liquids.
****
In case of equipment of special ventilation with reserve feeding.
N o t e - Spatial-and-planning elements designated for passengers flow or occupation are conditionally
defined as passenger premises.

APPENDIX 5.20А
(recommended)
SELECTION OF THE CONSTRUCTION STRUCTURES INSULATION TYPE
Insulation
sprayed-on
bitumen
Bitumen-polymeric
asphalt
polymeric
Requirements
plaster
to insulation
With
On
hot
polymeric painting soaking gluing painting soaking gluing cold hot
painting gluing
cement
cast
additives
By the water
head value:
Anti-capillary
++
++
+
=
normal (head +
+
+х)
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
+хх)
=
up to 10 m)
intense (head
++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
more than 10
m)
Page 225 of 295

Insulation
sprayed-on
bitumen
Bitumen-polymeric
asphalt
polymeric
Requirements
plaster
to insulation
With
On
hot
polymeric painting soaking gluing painting soaking gluing cold hot
painting gluing
cement
cast
additives
By
the
chemical
aggressiveness
of water:
leaching
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
=
total acid
+
+
+
+
+
+
++с ++
++
++
carbon dioxide
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ о, с +
+
+
+
magnesium
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ о, с +
+
+
+
sulfate
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ о, с +
+
+
+
petrochemical
о, pt
+
electrochemical
о, pt
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
By
the +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
mechanical
strength
By the crack
resistance:
Without cracks
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
++ ++ +
Cracks up to
о, rf
+
о, rf
+
о, rf
++
+
о, с
+
0,3 mm
By the outside
effects:
Above-ground
+
+
о, с
+
о, pr
о, с
+
+
+
о, с
+
area
Underground
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
++ +
+
+
+
area
By
the
conditions of
execution
of
works:
Construction
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
site
winter
о, с
о, с
о, с
+
о, с
о, с
о, с
о, с о, с о, с ++
о, с
о, с
conditions
Reference designations: х) – water head up to 3 m; хх) – the same, up to 5 m; «++» - absolutely preferable;
«+» - recommended; «-» - not recommended; «=» - possible in case of financial substantiation; «о» - additional
measures required; «с» - special selection of composition; «pr» - special protection; «pt» - special painting of
surface; «rf» - reinforcing.

APPENDIX 5.20B
(recommended)
CHEMICAL STABILITY OF BITUMENS AND GUDRONES AT THE
TEMPERATURE OF 25 °С IN DIFFERENT MEDIAS
Medias where the conditions of material are characterized as
Media where the conditions of material are
stable
characterized as unstable
Water
Acids: acetic (> 10 %), chloroacetic (10 %),
Acids: sulfuric (55 %), nitric (10 %), hydrochloric (30 %), chromic (≥ 10 %), fatty acids, formic (90 %),
phosphoric (85 %), H2SО3 (any concentration), humic, lactic, nitric (> 10 %), oleic (100 %), picric (100 %),
boric, butyric, benzoic, citric (10 %), fluorosilicic (40 %), oxalic sulfuric (> 70 %), oleum
(20 %), stearic
Salts: carbonates, nitrates, chlorids, sulfates, fluorides, Solvents: acetone (100 %), aniline,
electrolytes, cleaning soda, ammonium muriate, nitre, sulphite chloroform, phenol, acetic ether, gasoline,
liquor, aluminum sulfate, bicarbonates (10 %), phosphates (10 %) benzene, liquid hydrocarbons, carbon
disulfide
Organic materials: alcohols, formaldehyde (37 %), liquid wastes Strong oxidizers: chromic acid, etc
Page 226 of 295

Medias where the conditions of material are characterized as
Media where the conditions of material are
stable
characterized as unstable
of paper industry, fertilizers, wastes of textile and food industries, Mineral oils
breweries, tanning enterprises, etc
Inorganic materials: water polluted with inorganic substances Sodium hydroxide (25 % and more)
impurities, wastes of metal manufacture, etching sulfuric acid
Alcalies: ammonium hydroxide (28 %), calcium hydroxide
(saturated), potash
Gases: humidifies sulfurous anhydride, hydrogen sulfide

APPENDIX 5.20C
(recommended)
EXAMPLES OF TUNNEL STRUCTURES PROTECTION
Surface,
conditions of
contact with
aggressive
media

Method of works, tunnel lining structure
Closed

Cut-and-cover
Pre-fabricated
Pre-fabricated from
Cast-in-situ pressed or cast-in-situ reinforced concrete
From reinforced
From cast iron
blocks or solid
concrete liners or from concrete and reinforced concrete
liners
sections
blocks
External
Injection of combo or slurry under Injection of slurries into the ground Factory-made
surface,
the lining. Factory-made insulation under the lining structure with concrete soaking.
contacting with At
the
big Factory
made additives for unwatering and increase Reinforced glued
ground
or sections
with waterproofing by of the density of the concrete lining. insulation from 3 ground waters strong
water the
way
of Bi-layer concrete (reinforced concrete) 4 layers of glass
inflows and at the insertion
of lining: the first layer - shotcreting, fabric
cast-in-situ pressed lining or concrete waterproofing, or 2
caisson method paraffin
of
self
of work coating petrolatum grease layer of the arch-concrete shoring. layers
with
anti- on the surface of Hydro-insulation between the layers adhesive
from the corrosion and bio-resistant insulation.
corrosion
formworks
material or anti-corrosion coatings, the Protective concrete
hydrocarbon
second layer - cast-in-situ concrete or «wall in ground»
greases
reinforced concrete. Concrete with or
anti-filtration
(petrolatum with
high water-proofing features should be screen
with
corrosion
applied (such as with the МБ-01 chemical grouting
inhibitors,
and
plasticizer)
others)
Internal
Arrangement of ventilation with the purpose of decrease of humidity and aggressive gases
surface
concentration. Water removal from the leakage points. Gunning with combos (including the
contacting with ones with asbestos fiber) providing the good adhesion and waterproofing
aggressive
Insertion of protective coatings
Treatment of surface with soaking and compacting
gases
materials
Technology of tunneling preventing development of biological corrosion (anaerobic regime,
excluding of caisson method, etc)
Joints
Sealing and protection

APPENDIX 5.20D
(recommended)
APPROXIMATE COMPOSITIONS OF PROTECTIVE COATINGS
1. Coating with HBZG-2 for concrete surface:
- petrolatum - 81 %;
- high pressure polyethylene - 5 %;
- ceresine of synthetic mark 100 - 10 %;
- petroleum calcium sulfonaphthenate - 3 %;
- oxidized petrolatum - 1 %.
The coating should be inserted by the way of spraying using the compressed air at the
temperature of 100 - 150 °С with formation of the 3 - 7 mm thickness layer. The lower part of
lining contacting with the ground where the protection with combo is impossible, and in the
aggressive media, should be protected additionally by the way of insertion of protective
coatings before the lining mountings.
2. Coating on the metalized layer:
Page 227 of 295

- polyurethane varnish UR-293;
- enamel of the «Etinol» type;
- BAS mastic.
In addition, for metal surfaces protection with the composition including the 100 weight
parts of chemical resistant HSL varnish and 70 weight parts of zinc powder should be
provided.
3. Coating for sealing of gaps between the cast iron liners:
- petrolatum - 98 %;
- oxidized petrolatum - 1 %;
- inhibitor 8/2М - 1 %.
APPENDIX 6А
(obligatory)
ДОПУСТИМЫЕ ОТКЛОНЕНИЯ ФАКТИЧЕСКИХ РАЗМЕРОВ PREFABRICATED LININGS ОТ ПРОЕКТНОГО ПОЛОЖЕНИЯ
Dimensions in mm
Name
1. Station tunnels constructed by the closed method of works
1.1. Station of pier and column type
First trough blocks or liners of cut rings of the station tunnel in plane and profile
First ring of cast iron lining:
Support liners in plane:
Lower support
Upper support
Horizontal ellipticity
Support liners by height:
lower
upper
Vault by height:
middle tunnel
side tunnels
Horizontal advancing:
Cast iron
Reinforced concrete
Vertical advancing:
Cast iron
Reinforced concrete
Next liner rings:
In plane
Horizontal ellipticity
Vault by height:
middle tunnel
side tunnels
Horizontal and vertical advancing:
Cast iron
Reinforced concrete
distance from the axis of middle tunnel to columns
columns from vertical in the ring plane
1.2 pier type station:
Diameter (ellipticity) of rings:
Vertical
Horizontal
Under the 45° and 135° angles
Center of rings from the tunnel axis outside the mounting area
Cut rings plane in the direction of the station tunnel axis (displacement of picketage)
Next rings plane in the direction of the station tunnel axis
1.2.А. Pier type station from the reinforced concrete elements with metal lintel beams:

Deviation

± 15

+10 - -20
0 - +40
-50
+20
+40
+30 - +100
+10 - +50
±5
± 15
±5
± 15
± 30
-50
+30 - +100
-10 - +50
± 10
± 20
+30
± 20

+40
-80
+50
± 30
± 30
± 30

Page 228 of 295

Name
Deviation
Displacement of picketage of rings of the middle and side tunnels in the section
Up to 75
without opening
Ellipticity of the middle tunnel rings
+100
Gap between the lintel beams and liner ends
50 ± 10
Benches of the trough blocks
+60
Bench of the lintel beams edge toward the tunnel beyond the border of the
Up to 10
reinforced concrete liner
1.3. Column type station:
First side tunnel from the axis:
In plane
± 30
In profile
+30 - +50
Diameter (ellipticity) of the side tunnel rings:
Vertical
+30 - +70
Horizontal
-50
Under the 45° and 135° angles
+50
Distance between the side tunnel axes in plane
± 60
Marks of the similar rings of the side tunnels
± 50
Picketage of the similar rings of the side tunnels
± 20
Distance от оси среднего tunnel до columns
± 30
Mark of the middle vault of straighteners (on the axis)
+30 - +100
Column from vertical in the ring plane
± 20
1.3.А. Three-vault deep burial column station with column-and-run complex and main lining from pre-fabricated
elements:
Displacement of picketage of the side tunnel rings
± 50
Deviation of the side tunnel in plane
± 40
Deviation of the trough and lower support block position in profile
-20
Ellipticity at the laying of side tunnel rings by vertical radius
+90
Lower plane of the upper support block
+50
Ellipticity of the upper support block
-25
diameter (ellipticity) of rings of the side tunnels:
Vertical
+30 - +100
Horizontal
+50
Under the 45° and 135° angle
-50
Displacement of the upper support block in plane relating to the lower one toward
-30
the side tunnel
Support block in plane:
Lower
-20 - +10
Upper
-40
Mounting of metal structures
±5
Displacement of the upper hinge relating to the lower one toward the side tunnel
-30
axis
Gap between the upper support part and upper support block
No less than 40
Ellipticity of the upper vault of the middle tunnel:
In the vault
+30 - +100
Under the 45° and 135° angle
+15 - +50
Displacement of the axes of adjacent blocks of the upper vault in one ring at the
No more than 20
place of their adlacency to the support block by height
Benches between the support block and adjacent upper vault blocks
65 - 85
Benches between rings:
In the vault
No more than 100
Under the 45° and 135° angle
» 75
Radius of the lower vault lining
+30
1.4. Single-vault station:
Station axis in plane and profile
± 50
Radius of vault curvature:
Upper vault
+100
Lower vault
± 50
Page 229 of 295

Name
Deviation
Position of the bearing plates of the vault:
In plane
+20
In profile
± 15
1.4.А. Single-vault deep burial station with lining from pre-fabricated reinforced concrete elements extruded to
the rock, constructed by the method of through driving of the main line tunnels:
Station axis in plane and profile
± 50
Maximum sagging of the upper vault in the fifth ring after the girder
Up to 50
The same, in a month
» 100
Displacement of the lower vault in profile
± 50
Ellipticity of the half-ring of the upper vault before the execution of initial extruding
+5 - +10
Side and upper (lower) advancing of the half-rings by picketage
± 30
Allowable gap between two arches along the station length
Up to 60
Benches by the height between arches
» 100
Position of bearing units of the cast-in-situ reinforced concrete support:
In plane by the station axis
± 20
In profile (upper and lower break of the supporting sites)
+15
From the radial direction of the upper and lower bearing units’ planes to the width
+5
of the supporting site
Deviation of the profile surface of the supporting sites from the straightness along
Up to 4
the 700 mm length in two directions
1.4.Б. Single-vault deep burial station with lining from pre-fabricated reinforced concrete elements extruded into
the rock, with application of mechanized aggregates at the tunneling of the upper vault in the impermeable to
water grounds
1.4.Б.1. Driving of the support tunnels:
Axis in plane and profile
± 50
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring:
Vertical
+100
Horizontal and under the 45° and 135° angle
± 50
1.4.5.2. construction of supports in the side tunnels:
Deviation of the formwork in the points of adjacency with upper and lower vaults
± 50
Deviation of position of embedded (bearing) sheets:
In plane
± 20
In profile
± 10
Installation of formwork with embedded items:
In plane (from the station axis)
+20
In profile (upper and lower bearing units)
+15
Deviation from the radial direction of the upper and lower bearing units’ planes to
+5
the width of the supporting site
Deviation of the profile surface of the supporting sites from the straightness along
Up to 4
the 700 mm length in two directions
1.4.5.3. Upper vault tunneling:
Release of arch:
Opening of joint of the support block by the internal chord:
At the pressure of 100 kg/cm2
» 80
2
At the pressure of 220 kg/cm
» 30
Ellipticity of the half-rings before the execution of release
+100
For the mechanical sluice aggregate (MSA)
-5 - +10
Advancing of the side rings
± 50
The same, for MSA
± 30
» for the mechanical calotte aggregate (MCA)
± 40
Gap between two arches
Up to 60
The same, for MCA
» 40
Benches by the height between the adjacent arches sides
» 100
The same, for MCA
» 40
» for MSA
» 150
Deformation of the vault in a month after release
» 100
1.4.Б.4. Lower vault tunneling:
Page 230 of 295

Name
Deviation
Lower vault in profile
± 50
Opening of joint at the release of support blocks at the pressure of 100 - 120 kgf/cm2
Up to 80
Benches by the height
» 20
Advancing of the side rings
» 30
for MCA
» 40
1.5. Escalator tunnel
First rings:
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring
Vertical
± 30
Horizontal
-30
Under the 45° and 135° angle
± 25
Trough
-30
Vault
+10 - +50
Ring center:
In plane
±5
In profile
+10 - +30
Horizontal and vertical advancing of the front plane of ring
± 10
Next rings:
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring:
Vertical
+30
Horizontal
-30
Under the 45° and 135° angle
± 25
Ring center in plane and profile
± 25
Horizontal and vertical advancing of the front plane of ring
± 15
2. Main line tunnels constructed by the closed method of works
2.1. Circular outline tunnel with the pre-fabricated reinforced concrete lining (including the lining extruded into
the rock) and metal lining:
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring:
In the mounting area
± 25
Outside the mounting area
± 50
Center of rings from the tunnel axis outside the mounting area in plane and profile
± 50
Displacement of picketage
± 15
First ring:
Real distance from the longitudinal axis
± 25
Trough segments
+30
Horizontal diameter
-20
Diameter under the 45° and 135° angle
± 15
Vault
+10 - +50
Assembled ring radius:
Vertical
+40
Horizontal
-20
Under the 45° and 135° angle
± 15
Real center of the assembled ring
± 50
Real mark of the trough
+30
Vertical and horizontal advancing
± 30
Torsion of ring
± 20
Vertical and horizontal advancing of the ring plane
± 30
2.2. Tunnel with the cast-in-situ pressed lining:
Tunnel axis in plane and profile
± 70
Pressed rings (by the vertical plane between them)
± 30
3. Shaft
3.1. Driving of shaft from below:
End plane of the ring relating to the horizon:
First rings
±5
Next rings
± 10
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring:
First rings
± 15
Page 231 of 295

Name
Next rings
Shaft axis from the vertical
Diameter of ring at the drill and blast method
3.2. Driving by the drop shaft method
End surface of the shaft relating to the horizon
Diameter (ellipticity) of the drop shaft
Shaft axis from the vertical
The same, at the penetration in thixotropic jacket
Diameter (ellipticity) of the ring before the penetration in thixotropic jacket
4. Station constructed by the cut-and-cover method of works
Pit axis
Pile shoring of pit or protective «wall in ground»
Verticality of the trench soldiers at the «wall in ground» method
Mark of the pit bottom under the laying of concrete workpiece
Top of the concrete workpiece
Trough block:
In plane
In profile
Wall block in plane and profile
Wall block and columns from vertical
Vertical and horizontal advancing of the blocks
Mark of the upper supporting site of the wall block and columns
Wall blocks in plane and profile at the level of 1m from the rail heads
Distance between the station tunnels’ axes
Platform at the height of 1,10 m from the level of the rail heads
Border stone at the platform at the distance of 1,45 m from the track axis
5. Main line tunnel constructed by the cut-and-cover method of works
5.1. Main line tunnel from the lining assembled from the solid sections:
Section in plane and profile
Horizontal and vertical advancing of the sections
Slope of section
Bench between sections
6. Approach opening
7. Near-tunnel structure:
Closed method of works
Cut-and-cover method of works
8 Track to the tunnel:
Line control survey point by picketage
Mark of the line control survey point
Ends of the 5 m length rail track section:
In plane (should not have systematic character)
By the height, the same
Displacement in plane and profile
Widening of rail gage
Narrowing of the rail gage
Measured rise of the rail deflection relating to the calculated for chord:
20 m length
10 m length
Displacement of the rail strings in plane and profile at the 5m length section (at the
adjacent chords there should not be different signs)
9. Connecting chamber:
Closed method of works
Cut-and-cover method of works
10. Traction step-down substation, blocks of production and domestic premises:

Deviation
± 50
± 50
± 100
± 10
± 50
± 50
*
± 0,01Н , but no more
than ± 250
± 25
± 10
-50 - +250
± 0,01Н
± 10
± 10
± 25
+10 - -20
± 25
0,002Н, but no more than
± 25
± 25
± 10
± 25
± 10
±5
+10
Similarly to the item 4
± 30
± 20
0,001Н, but no more than
± 20
± 10
Similarly to the item 2
Similarly to the item 2
Similarly to the item 5
± 30
±2
±2
±2
±3
±4
-2
±3
±2
±2

Similarly to the item 2
» item 5

Page 232 of 295

Name
Deviation
Closed method of works
» item 1
Cut-and-cover method of works
» item 5
N o t e – in the «Deviation» graph the Н symbol means the height of the structure or shaft element.

APPENDIX 6.6А
(reference)
TUNNELING COMPLEXES
Grounds
Hard consistency clays

Complex
КТ1-5,6

Rocky
Mixed (rocky and non-rocky)

КМ-24
КТ-5,6Д2

Rocky

-

Sands with argillic ground bands ТЩБ-1
Sand-and-argillic with gibbers or КМ-42М1
rocky ground bands
The same
Sands

КТ-5,6Б2
ЩМ-17М

Shield
ПЩН-1

Executive body
Slotted with 4-star bar

lining
Pre-fabricated reinforced
concrete, including the
extruded into the ground
ЩМР-1 Rotor
The same
КТ-5,6Д2 Alternating: excavator
»
and grooving
105-Т
Grooving
Cast-in-situ
pressed
concrete
ЩБ-7
Jaw-type
The same
ЩМЭ-1 Excavator
Pre-fabricated reinforced
concrete and from the cast
iron liners
КТ-5,6Б2
»
The same
ЩМ-17 Jaw-type
(dissecting
»
sites)

APPENDIX 6.7.А1
(recommended)
АCТ
OF EQUIPMENT OF THE DEWATERING WELL
№ ______ filter at __________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
We, undersigned, _______________________________________ have drawn up this act
regarding the following: the dewatering well № ________ is equipped with filter ________
mm installed cording to the drawing № _______________ within the depth interval
________ m.
Depth of the well _________ m. Dirt collector _____________________
The sand-and gravel envelope of the filter is executed from the fraction
____________________
The filter is installed by the team _____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conclusion: ____________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.7.А2
(recommended)
АCТ
OF PUMPING OF THE DEWATERING WELL
№ _____ air lift at ___________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
We, undersigned, _______________________________________ have drawn up this act
regarding the following: pumping of the dewatering well № _______ constructed at the PQ
(piquet) _________ using air lift was conducted from _________ till _______ 200___ year
Structure of the well (filter) __________________________.
(description)

Page 233 of 295

The dewatering installation shows normal operation, the compressor creates the pressure
_________ atm, debit of installation in the moment the startup _____________ m3/h.
Pumping of well was conducted till the full water clearing.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.7.А3
(recommended)
АCТ
OF COMMISSIONING OF THE DEWATERING INSTALLATION
at ____________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» ______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition:
Chairman – representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Members of committee - representatives:
general contractor
__________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization ___________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the inspection of the dewatering ejection unit, light well
point
system,
dewatering well with bore-hole pumps (underline the necessary) № _________________ at
the section from PQ __________ to PQ __________, executed according to the drawings №
__________.
The pumping plant includes __________ working pumps and ______ reserve pumps of
(number)

(number)

the mark____________.
The pumping plant is constructed at the PQ ПК __________. The number of operating
well points __________ pcs.
Debit of installation __________ m3/h.
The following material were represented to the committee: _________________________
After the studying the project and executive documentation and inspection of the
installation the committee considers that the dewatering installation has been mounted in
correspondence with the project and taking into consideration the changes coordinated with
the project organization _______________________________________________________.
(list)

Decision of the committee:
The dewatering installation at the section from PQ __________ to PQ __________
To be put into operation from ___________.
(date)

Signatures:
Handed over by
representatives of subcontractor

Accepted by
representatives of customer
general contractor
design organization

APPENDIX 6.7.А4
(recommended)
ACT
OF THE SITE READINESS TO EXECUTION OF MAIN WORKS AFTER THE
Page 234 of 295

COMPLETION OF PRELIMINARY DEWATERING PERIOD
at _____________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer _______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization _______________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Has studied the represented executive documentation _________________
(list)

Committee has ascertained:
As of the date «____»________________ 200___ year at the section from PQ _________
to PQ __________ decrease of the level of underground water to the ____________ mark has
been achieved.
Committee has concluded:
Conduction of the mining works at the section from PQ ________ to PQ ________ to be
allowed to the construction organization _______________ since «____»_____ 200___ year.
(name)

Signatures:
Handed ober by
representatives of subcontractor

Accepted by
representatives of customer
general contractor
design organization

APPENDIX 6.7.А5
(recommended)
ACT
OF TERMINATION OF THE DEWATERING WORKS
at ___________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» ______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer _______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization ___________________________________________________
after the inspection of the status of works on the construction
_______________________ at the section from PQ _______ to PQ ________ at place

of

(name of structure, object)

concluded:
The section from PQ __________ to PQ __________ was given under the tunneling
according to the act № __________ dated __________.
(date)

Page 235 of 295

In the project of execution of works the following has been provided:
Period of the construction works ______ months, operation of the dewatering installation
during ____________ machine-shifts, and operation of well points in the number of
___________ pcs during __________ shifts.
As of the date _________ the works on the erection of structures with water-proofing are
(date)

executed ____________________________.
(indicate the status of works)

Taking into consideration
________________.

the

status

of

works

the

committee

concluded

(decision of the committee)

Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.7.B1
(recommended)
ACT
OF PUTTING INTO OPERATION OF FREEZING SYSTEM
at ___________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer _______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the inspection of the freezing system № __________ at the section from PQ
__________ to PQ ______, executed according to the drawings № __________.
The cooling installation includes _________ operating compressors (aggregates).
(number)

The freezing system has been constructed at the section from PQ __________ to PQ
_______.
The number of operating freezing columns ___________ pcs.
The
following
materials
have
benn
represented
to
the
committee:
______________________________
After the studying of the project and executive documentation and inspection of the
system the committee concluded that the freezing system has been mounted in
correspondence with the design and taking into consideration the changes coordinated with
the design organization ______________________________________________.
(list)

Conclusion of the committee:
The freezing system at the section from PQ __________ to PQ __________ to be put into
operation from __________.
(date)

Signatures:
Handed over by
representatives of subcontractor

Accepted by
representatives of customer
general contractor
design organization
Page 236 of 295

APPENDIX 6.7.B2
(recommended)
ACT
OF THE SITE READINESS FOR EXECUTION OF MAIN WORKS AFTER THE
COMPLETION OF ACTIVE FREEZING PERIOD
at ___________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» ______________ 200__ year.
Committee in the composition of representatives:
subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer ________________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Has studied the represented executive documentation _________________
(list)

Committee has ascertained:
As of the date «____» _____________ 200___ year at the section from PQ ___________
to PQ __________ the design dimensions and temperatures of the ice-and-ground wall have
been achieved.
Committee has concluded:
Conduction of the mining works at the section from PQ ________ to PQ ________ to be
allowed to the construction organization _______________ since «____»_____ 200___ year.
Signatures:
Handed over by
Accepted by
representatives of subcontractor
representatives of customer
general contractor
design organization
APPENDIX 6.7.B3
(recommended)
ACT
OF TERMINATION OF THE FREEZING WORKS
at ____________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» ______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
subcontractor __________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

after the inspection of the status of works on the construction
_______________________ at the section from PQ _______ to PQ ________ at place

of

(name of structure, object)

concluded:
Page 237 of 295

The section from PQ __________ to PQ __________ was given under the tunneling
according to the act № __________ dated __________.
(date)

In the project of execution of works the operation of the freezing system in the
__________ mode during ________ days, and operation of the freezing columns in the
number of _______ pcs during _______ days has been provided.
As of the date __________ the works on the erection of structures with water-proofing
(дата)

have been executed ____________________.
(indicate the status of works).

Taking into consideration
________________.

the

status

of

works

the

committee

concluded

(decision of the committee)

Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.7.C1
(recommended)
Construction of ________________________
(name of structure, object)

Log-book
on execution of drilling works
Date, Section
shift of works
1

2

Well drilling parameters
Drilling
The
Drilled
Drilling period, start
well
during the
diameter, Drilling
equipment - end, h,
depth, m
number
shift, m
mm
angle
min
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Notes Signature
10

11

APPENDIX 6.7.C2
(recommended)
Construction of _________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
on the grounds cementation
Date, Section
shaft of works
1

2

Type Composition of
The
Solution Injection
Depth of
and
solution, t
well
W/C volume, pressure,
well, m mark of
number
m3
МPа
cement additives
cement
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Note

Signature

11

12

APPENDIX 6.7.C3
(recommended)
Construction of _____________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
on injection of the urea solutions into the ground
Carbamide
Щавелевая
Depth
Gel
resin
кислота
The
Injection
Date,
Round of
formation Solution
well
density
density
pressure, Note Signature
shaft
number round,
volume,
volume, period, volume, l
number
МPа
γ,
γ,
m
min
l
l
3
3
g/cm
g/cm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Page 238 of 295

Carbamide
Щавелевая
Depth
Gel
resin
кислота
The
Injection
Date,
Round of
formation Solution
well
density
density
pressure, Note Signature
shaft
number round,
volume,
volume, period, volume, l
number
МPа
γ,
γ,
m
min
l
l
g/cm3
g/cm3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

Page 239 of 295

APPENDIX 6.7.В4
(recommended)
Construction _____________________________
(наименование объекта, участка)

Log-book
on execution of works on jet cementation of grounds
Section of
Date, works
shift (location
of pile)
1

2

Pile parameters
Technological parameters
Composition of solution
Angle of Length
Number Diameter Monitor Monitor
Water Additive,
Length Diameter
Injection
inclination of
of
of
rotation lifting
Cement to
% to the
well №
of pile, of pile,
pressure,
to vertical, well,
nozzles, nozzles, speed, speed,
mark cement cement
m
m
МPа
degrees
m
pcs.
mm
rpm
m/min
ration mass
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Materials consumption
Cement
Cement Additive
Note Signature
per 1
per per pile,
r.m. of
pile, kg
kg
pile, kg
16
17
18
19
20

Page 240 of 295

APPENDIX 6.7.C5
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE REFERENCE WELL TESTING
№ _____, drilled at ____________________________
(наименование участка, сооружения)

«_____» ___________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Construction-and-mounting organization ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical supervision of customer ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the testing of the reference well № __________ for inspection of results and
sufficiency of the executed cementation works.
Location of the well ________________________________.
(section, piquet, № of adjacent wells)

Depth of the well, zones, installation of plug _______________.
(indicate)

Testing results
Depth of
interval, m

Thockness of
zone, m

Water testing
Specific water
Pressure, МPа
absorption,
2
(kgf/cm )
l/(min⋅m2)

Cementation
Cement
Pressure, МPа
absorption per 1
2
(kgf/cm )
m, kg

Conclusion on the testing results _________________________________
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.7.C6
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE CONCEALED GROUNDS INJECTION WORKS ACCEPTANCE
(jet cementation)
Executed at ____________________________
(наименование объекта construction)

«_____» ________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Construction-and-mounting organization ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical supervision of customer ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Studied the executive documentation, conducted inspection of works executed by
____________________________________________________________ and
(name of the construction-and-mounting organization)

Drawn up the present act regarding the following:
1. For the inspection and acceptance the works on ________________________________
(name of works)

at the section _______________________________________________have been submitted.
(name)

Page 241 of 295

2.
The
works
have
been
executed
according
to
the
project
__________________________________________________________________________
(name of design organization, № of drawings and dates of their issueа)

3. have been used for preparation of solutions _____________________________
(name and results of acceptance control of materials)

4. has been applied for injection _____________________________________________
(kind of solution, components ratio, characteristics of solution)

5. The preparation and injection of solutions has been conducted____________________
__________________________________________________________________________
(type of mixing and injection equipment, technological parameters of the solution injection, pressure, monitor lifting speed,
consumption of solution, etc)

6. The work was executed by the team_________________________________________
(team foreman surname, n.p.)

7. Results of control works ___________________________________________
(type of control, reference piles’ numbers, wells, characteristics of the ground-and-cement material)

8. Date:
Start of works _____________________, end of works ____________________.
(month, year)

(month, year)

Conclusion of the committee:
The works have been executed in correspondence with the design, construction standards
and regulations, and meet the requirements to their acceptance.
The submitted to the acceptance works indicated in the clause 1 of the present act, have
been accepted with the quality rating _____________.
On the base of mentioned above the execution of _____________________ to be allowed.
(indicate the king of subsequent works)

Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.10А
(recommended)
DIMENSIONS OF HOLES AND TRENCHES FOR PIPING AND AIR DUCTS
LAYING IN THE CONSTRUCTION STRUCTURES, BUILDINGS, AND
FACILITIES
Designation of pipeline (air-duct)
Heating
Single-pipe system stand
Two stands of the double-pipe system
Piping to devices and coupling
Main stand
Main line
Water pipeline, sewerage
Water pipeline stand:
one
two
One water pipeline stand and one sewerage stand with diameter of:
50 mm
100, 150 mm
One sewerage stand with diameter of:
50 mm
100, 150 mm
Two water pipeline stands and one sewerage stand with diameter of:
50 mm
100, 150 mm
Water piping:

Dimensions, mm
Trenches
Holes
width
depth
100×100
150×100
100×100
200×200
250×300

130
200
60
200
-

130
130
60
200
-

100×100
200×100

130
200

130
130

250×150
350×200

250
350

130
200

150×150
200×200

200
250

130
250

200×150
320×200

250
380

130
250

Page 242 of 295

Dimensions, mm
Trenches
Holes
width
depth
60
60
100×100
100×200
200×200
250×300
600×400
400×400

Designation of pipeline (air-duct)

one
two
Main sewerage piping
Sewerage collector
External heating networks, no less than
The same, water pipeline, sewerage
Ventilation
Round cross-section air-ducts with the diameter D
D + 150
The same, square cross-section with А and Б sides
А(B) + 150
N o t e – for the holes in openings the first size means the length (in parallel to the wall to which the pipeline
or air-duct is fixed), the second one means the width. For the holes in walls the first size means the width, and
the second one – the height.

APPENDIX 6.10.B1
(recommended)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISTANCES BETWEEN THE PIPES FIXING POINTS
Conditioned diameter of pipe, mm
15 - 20
25 - 32
40 - 80
100

Distance between the fixing points, m
2,5
3,0
3,5 - 4,0
6,0

APPENDIX 6.10.B2
(recommended)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISTANCE BETWEEN THE FIXING POINTS OF
WIRES LAID IN THE VERTICALLY INSTALLED TUBINGS
Conductor cross-section, mm2, including
Distance between the fixing points, m
50
30
70 - 150
20
185 - 240
15
N o t e – the fixing of wires should be executed using the cleats or clamps in the cable conduits or junction
boxes, or at the ends of pipes.

APPENDIX 6.10.B3
(recommended)
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE RADIUSES OF CABLE BENDS
Cables
Power, rated for 35KV, with paper insulation, armored and unarmored:
In aluminum sheath, multi-conductor
In lead sheath, multi-conductor
In lead or aluminum sheath, single-conductor
Power, rated for 3KV, with plastic insulation
armored and unarmored, in aluminum sheath
armored, without aluminum sheath
unarmored, in plastic sheath, without aluminum or steel corrugated
sheath
Power, rated for 6 – 20 KV, with plastic insulation and sheath,
armored and unarmored
Power, with rubber insulation, in lead, PVC, or rubber sheath:
armored
unarmored
Control, with rubber or plastic insulation:
in lead sheath, armored
in lead sheath, unarmored
In PVC, rubber sheath, armored with one profiled steel strip

Ratio of radius of the internal bend
curvature relating to the cable
external diameter
25
15
25
15
10
6
15

15
10
12
10
7
Page 243 of 295

Ratio of radius of the internal bend
curvature relating to the cable
external diameter
6

Cables

The same, unarmored
Signal-and-locking:
armored
12
unarmored
7
Communication:
Fiber-optic
20
local communication, in lead sheath, armored
20
mine communication, in lead sheath, armored
20
N o t e – At the laying of other mark cables, including the not applied before marks, the minimum allowable
bend radiuses should be received from the manufacturers, or the reference literature should be used.

APPENDIX 6.10.B4
(recommended)
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE CABLE LAYING
LEVELS
Maximum allowable distance between the levels for cables
with paper insulation, m
In the lead sheath
In the aluminum sheath
At the voltage, KV
At the voltage, KV
1 and 3
10
1 and 3
10

Name

Mass-impregnated cable without stop joints:
armored
unarmored
Mass-impregnated and drained cable
Cable with mass-impregnated non-draining
insulation

25
20
100
-

15
25
15
15
25
15
Without limit
Without limit
Without limit

APPENDIX 6.10.B5
(mandatory)
ALLOWABLE CABLE PULLING FORCES
Pulling force, KN, for the aluminum sheath of cable, at the voltage, KV
Cable conductor cross-section,
mm2
1
10
1,7
3,7
3×25
1,8
3,9
3×35
2,3
4,4
3×50
2,9
4,9
3×70
3,4
5,7
3×95
3,9
6,4
3×120
5,9
7,4
3×150
6,4
8,3
3×185
7,4
9,8
3×240
Notes
1. The pulling of cable with plastic or lead sheath is allowed by the conductors only.
2. The pulling of control cables, power armored and unarmored cables with cross-section up to 3×16 mm2 is
recommended by the armor or sheath only, using the mesh grip; the pulling forces in this case should not exceed
1 KN.
3. In case of use of the new mark cable the forces and pulling methods should be accepted by the data of the
cable manufacturer.

APPENDIX 6.10.B6
(recommended)
PROTOCOL
OF THE WIRES, CABLES, AND ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT INSULATION
RESISTANCE TESTING AT THE RATED VOLTAGE UP TO 1KV
______________________________________________________________________
(name of network, installation, object)

«_____» _________________ 200___ year
Page 244 of 295

The work on the laying and mounting of wires, cables, and mounting of electrical
equipment
is
executed
by
________________________________________________________________
(name of organization)

The measurements are conducted using the megohmmeter of the ________ type at
__________ (KV), № of issue _______ tested by the representatives
___________________________________ of the ________________________________
(date, name of laboratory)

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

With participation of representative_____________________________________________.
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Data of measurements
Name

Mark

Rated voltage, KV

Crosssection,
mm2

Length,
m

Insulation resistance, МОhм
А-В

А-С

В-С

А-0

В-0

С-0

Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.10.B7
(recommended)
PROTOCOL
OF TESTING OF THE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT GROUNDING RESISTANCE
________________________________________________________________________
(name of network, installation, object)

«_____» ___________________ 200___ year
The works on the mounting of the electrical equipment and earthing facilities are executed
by ________________________________________________________________________
(name of organization)

The measurements are conducted using the devise of the __________ type, № of issue
_______
tested
by
the
representatives
__________________________
________________________________of the_____________________________________
(дата, наименование лаборатории)

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

With participation of representative ______________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Results of testing
Name of the electrical equipment

№ of the power
network drawing

Grounding
resistance, Оhм

Note

Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.10.B8
(recommended)
INSTRUCTION
ON THE CABLE MARKING
1. General provisions
The cable marking taking into account the maximal pithiness, easiness of decoding and
demonstrativeness should contain the following information:
а) type of current;
b) voltage;
c) cable mark;
d) cable number in case of availability more than one cable in the feeding line;
e) номер источника питания - substation;
Page 245 of 295

e1) the same, SB section;
e2) » SB panel;
f) feeding line number;
f1) cable jumper number;
g) consumer number - substation;
g1) the same, electrical installation;
g2) » distributing point;
g3) » control cabinet;
g4) » electrical receiver;
i) number and cross-section of the cable conductors;
к) track number.
2. Labels
Structure and dimensions in mm for the marking labels are represented in the Figure 1,а.
The labels should be suspended to the cable using the 1mm diameter copper or galvanized
steel wire. The wire should be turned around the cable twice. The ends of the wire should be
one turn twisted.
The ring near the label should have the diameter no less than 10mm (figure 1,b), in order to
the label could easily move.
Depending on the location of the cable the labels should be suspended according to the
Figure 1,c. The labels’ suspension should be executed in every 100 m along the length of the
straight cable section. At the cable laid in parallel the label should be suspended in one and
the same place (near the piquet marks).
The label should also be suspended near the end and connecting sleeves, on the both sides
at the places of laying of cable through the walls, near the entrance under the platform, to the
collector, and to the other premises.
3. Insertion of designations
Digital and symbol designations should be inserted on the label using the electrical pencil
made from the nichrome wire with diameter no less than 1 mm and connected to the 6V
transformer.
At the insertion of designations no one of the figures or symbols should not be similar with
other one (for example, symbol «З» with the figure «3»); the height of figures and symbols
should be equal to 6 mm. to separate the designations the «dash» symbol should be applied.
4. Designations
At the front side of the label the а), b), and c) designations should be inserted.
At the label of the cable of TTC, communication, or automation devices additionally the:
«TTC», «Communication», or «Automation» should be indicated.
At the back side of the label the other information depending on the electrical network type
should be indicated.

Page 246 of 295

b)

c)

а - общий вид; b - узел подвешивания к проволоке; c - варианты подвешивания к кабелю

Figure 1. – Marking label
Examples
of the cable marking for the main types of electrical networks
N o t e – The front side of the label is indicated with the solid line, the back side - with dash line.

10KV network
Cables of the TSS from the municipal energy system feeding lines

a
b
c

f
e
i

Cable jumper between TSS

Page 247 of 295

e
d
g
i

Cables of the SS from TSS feeding lines

e
e1,g
i

825V traction network
Cables of contact network from TSS feeding lines

a
b
c

e,g
d
i

Contact rail cable jumpers

e,g,g1
d
i

Cables of negative booster lines from IB to TSS

Page 248 of 295

a
b
c

e,f
d
i

Cables of the inter-track bonds

f1
d
i

380/220V network
Designations of electrical installations:
- escalators 1 (2) of vestibule - ЭВ1 (2);
- tunnel ventilation installation - TVI;
- drainage plant - DP;
- sewerage installation - SI;
- warm (warm air) curtain – WC (WAC);
- equipment room, relay room, switch room – eq., rel., sw.
- station dispatcher point – SDP, etc.
Cables of the electrical installations from TSS (SS) feeding lines

Page 249 of 295

a
b
c

- a,e,e1,
e2
- g1
-d
-i

e,e1,e2
Vestibule 1
g2
i

Cables of main lines with the line boxes

- е, е1, е2
- number of the first and last line box at the given line
-i

Cables between the line boxes

- е, е1, е2
- number of the line boxes between which the cable is laid
-i

Cables from the distributing box at the main line to the electrical installation
Page 250 of 295

- number of distributing box
- g1
- g2
-i
LB

Line and distributing boxes
e,e1,e2
number
b
Allowable power

DB
e, e1,e2
DB number
g1
g2

The odd numbers should be given to the line and distributing boxes located at the odd
track, and the even numbers – to the boxes located at the even track.
For the LB and DB located at the runs toward the substation with less number, the number
with the «0» figure should be given (01, 03, 05), at the runs toward the substation with bigger
number – with the «5» figure (51, 53, 55).
Cables between the distributing points

- е, е1, е2
- numbers of DP between which the cable is laid
-d
-i

Cables from distributing points, control cabinets to the electrical receivers

g2
g3
i

Page 251 of 295

g3
g4
i

Cables of the contact network breakers’ electrical drives feeding
e,e1,e2
g3
g4
i

Cables of the TTC installations feeding from TSS or SS

a
b
c

e,e1
g4
d
i

e,e1
g4 Traffic light
i

Cables between the TCC cabinets and from the equipment room to the cabinet

Page 252 of 295

- numbers of cabinets between which the cable is laid
-i

- number of traffic light to which the cable from equipment room is connected
-i

Cables of Underground Railroad communication

c

Cross number
g
i

- numbers of crosses between which the cable is laid
-f
-i

Page 253 of 295

- number of cross from which the cable goes
- the object to which the cable is connected
-i

Communication cables of third-party organizations laid in the Underground Railroad
facilities

c
i

- design number of cable
- operating number of cable

Control cables of automation and locking of all designations

c

-е
- automation
-g
-i

Page 254 of 295

-е
- g2 and number of 825V feeding line
-i

- number of junction box from which the cable goes
- number of junction box to which the cable is connected
-i

The cables in other networks should be marked according to the same principal.
APPENDIX 6.10.B9
(mandatory)
JOB SPECIFICATION № _____
ON THE EXECUTION OF ELECTRIC MOUNTING WORKS BY OUTSIDE
ORGANIZATIONS
In operating structures _______________________________________________
(name of Underground Railroad)

(to be filled in two copies by the organization executing the mounting works).
At the execution of works
Organization ________________________
(name)
observe the safety rules and
Telephone ____________________________
instructions of technical supervision
Stamp
Executor of works ____________________________________________________
(position, surname, n.p.)

With the team in composition of __________ is charged to execute ____________________,
(persons)

(place and name of works)

Start of works _______________________ 200___ year
End of works _______________________ 200___ year
Responsible manager of works ________________________________________
(position, surname, n.p.)

Telephone ___________________________
Personnel included in the composition of team has been instructed on the safety
engineering, on the knowledge of the «Instruction on execution of works by outside
organizations in the operating facilities of the Underground Railroad», and taking into
consideration the health admitted to the work in the Underground Railroad tunnels.
Executor of works ___________________________
(signature)

Responsible manager of works ___________________________
(signature)

The job specification is issued by______________________________________________
Page 255 of 295

(signature of head or chief engineer of the mounting organization)

N o t e – the job specification on mounting works should be given for six working days, on the laying of
cable – for one day.

Then the job specification should be filled in by subdivision issuing the allowance to
execute the mounting works.
It is allowed to execute the work from ______ hour ______ min to ______ hour ______
min.
The job specification is signed by ___________________________
(position, surname, n.p.)

For execution of works indicated in the job specification the following should be made:
__________________________________________________________________________
(content of the instructions)

The job specification and instructions have been received by the executor of works
___________________________
(signature)

The instructions on the execution of works is given by ____________________________
(surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Assignment for conduction of technical supervision is received by ___________________
(date, surname, signature)

Registering of daily start and end of works
Date

Hour

Start of works
Executor of
Min
works
(signature)

Technical
supervision
(signature)

Date

Hour

End of works
Executor of
Min
works
(signature)

Technical
supervision
(signature)

Coordination of works with other services__________________________________
APPENDIX 6.10.C1
(recommended)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE TO ADJUSTMENT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

«____» __________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
construction organization ________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

mounting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

adjusting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer _______________________________________________________________
Page 256 of 295

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ____________________________________________.
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

stated:
1. The submitted to the acceptance for adjustment________________________________.
(name of equipment, installation, object)

Is mounted in full correspondence with drawings _______________________________
(list of drawings, name of design organization)

2. The premises ___________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

Corresponds to requirements of the present standards and regulations;
3. The executive documentation for adjustment is submitted in the full volume.
4. The individual testing have been conducted, act dated__________.
(date)

The committee concluded to accept the ________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

for adjustment.
Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.10.C2
(recommended)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE TO INDIVIDUAL TESTING
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

«____» _________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
adjusting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

mounting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted having inspected of execution of adjustment works _____________________,
(name of equipment, installation, object)

Stated that the adjustment works necessary for conduction of individual testing of
________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

have been executed, act dated ___________.
(дата)

The committee concluded: conduction of individual testing of ______________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

to be allowed.
Signatures:

APPENDIX 6.10.C3
(recommended)
ACT
OF INDIVIDUAL TESTING
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Page 257 of 295

customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

mounting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

adjusting organization _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Stated that _________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

Passed the running, testing, measurements, etc, according to the technical conditions,
certificate ______________, and in the result of the individual testing of the mentioned
equipment
(name)

the requirements on its assembling, mounting, and parameters indicated in the documentation
of manufacturers are observed, and failures in its operation were not revealed.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.10.C4
(recommended)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF THE VENTILATION INSTALLATIONS TO ADJUSTMENT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, structure, object)

«_____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

field supervision ______________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical supervision ____________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor (mounting, adjusting) organizations ________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the acceptance of_________________________________________________
(name of installation, structure, object)

for adjustment.
Inspection of ventilation installations and testing of the equipment in operation showed
that the ventilation installations have been mounted in correspondence with the project
documentation.
The protocols of individual testing of ventilation installations and conclusion of the
adjusting organization regarding the readiness of the ventilation installations to adjustment
have been submitted to the committee.
At the inspection and testing of the effectiveness of operation of the ventilation
installations the following deviations from the project documentation and deficiencies
________________________, not preventing the normal operation have been revealed,
Page 258 of 295

(list)

and should be eliminated before the appointment of the state acceptance committee.
The committee concluded:
On the base of inspection, testing in operation conditions, and submitted documentation
the ventilation installation __________________________________________________
(name of installation, structure, object)

to be accepted for adjustment.
Signatures:
Defects and deficiencies ____________________________________________________
(list)

have been eliminated.
Representative of operating organization ______________________________
(position, signature)

APPENDIX 6.10.C5
(recommended)
ACT
OF HYDROSTATIC OR MANOMETRIC TESTING ON HERMITICITY
_______________________________________________________________________
(name of system, installation, object)

«_____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

mounting (construction) organization ____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the inspection and testing of the mounting quality and stated:
1. The mounting has been executed according to the project documentation
____________________________________________________________________________
(numbers of drawings, name of design organization)

2. The testing has been conducted by___________________________________________
(hydrostatic or manometric method)

pressure _____ МPа (_____ kgf/cm2) during _____ min.
3. The pressure drop compiled _____ МPа (_____kgf/cm2).
4. The attributes of break or structural failure in the _______________________________,
(name of system, installation)

Condensate in the welded and threaded joints, heating devices, on the surface of pipes, fittings,
as well as leakage of water through the water intake fittings, flushing facilities, etc, has not
been revealed (delete as applicable).
The committee concluded:
The mounting has been conducted in correspondence with the project documentation,
effective technical conditions, standards, construction standards and regulations regarding the
execution and acceptance of works.
The system passed the testing on hermiticity by pressure.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.10.C6
(recommended)
ACT
OF TESTING OF INTERNAL SEWERAGE AND WATER REMOVAL SYSTEMS
________________________________________________________________________
Page 259 of 295

(name of system, installation, object)

«____» _________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
field supervision ______________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical supervision ____________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor (mounting, adjusting) organizations ________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted inspection and testing of the mounting quality __________________________
(name of installation, structure, object)

And stated:
1. The mounting has been executed according to the project documentation
______________________________________________________________________.
(numbers of drawings, name of design organization)

2. The testing has been conducted by the way of spillage of water with simultaneous
opening of ________ sanitary devices connected to the inspected section during _____ min,
(number)

or filling with water to the height of the floor (delete as applicable).
3. At the inspection during the testing the leakage through the pipe walls and connection
places have not been revealed.
The committee concluded:
The mounting has been executed in correspondence with the project documentation,
effective technical conditions, standards, construction standards and regulations regarding the
execution and acceptance of works. The system passed testing by the water spillage.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 6.10.C7
(recommended)
ACT
OF COMPLETION OF STARTUP AND COMMISSIONING WORKS
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, object)

«____» __________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
construction organization ________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

mounting organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

pre-commissioning organization ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

stated:
1. The equipment, installation, object ________________________________________
(name)

Page 260 of 295

Have been accepted for execution of startup and commissioning works according to the act
____________________________.
(name)

2. The startup and commissioning works on the________________________________,
(name of equipment, installation)

mounted in the _________________________________________________________
(name of object)

Have been conducted_________________________________________________________
(name of pre-commissioning organization)

from _____________ to _____________.
(date)

(date)

3. In the result of conducted works the following is executed _______________________.
(list of works)

4. The equipment, installation, object _________________________________________
(name)

after the conduction of startup and commissioning works are ready for submission to the
acceptance committee and putting into operation.
The following is attached to the act____________________________________________
(list of protocols of measurements and other data regarding the executed works).

Signatures:

APPENDIX 7А
(mandatory)
LIST
OF DOCUMENTATION TO BE SUBMITTED AT THE COMMISSIONING OF THE
UNDERGROUND RAILROAD CONSTRUCTION OBJECTS
1. Documentation to be submitted by the customer to the State acceptance committee.
1.1. Explanatory note, design and estimate documentation approved in the established
order, and reference about the basic technical-and-economic indices of the object submitted to
the commissioning.
1.2. Documentation on the registering and coordination of changes and deviations from the
approved design and estimate documentation taken place during the construction process.
1.3. Certificate of the line and certificates of stations according to the Appendix 7D.
1.4. List of design, scientific-and-research, and surveying organizations participated in the
designing.
1.5. General plan of all lands assigned for the construction, with corresponding documents
on the land use right, and easement sheet.
1.6. Documents on the geodetic base for construction and on the geodesic works during the
construction process issued by the customer.
1.7. Documents on the geology and hydro-geology of the construction sites, on the results
of testing and analysis of ground waters.
1.8. Permission issued by the State Architectural and Construction Supervision authorities
for execution of construction-and-mounting works on the residential-and-civil designation
objects.
1.9. Composition of the approved stage or startup complex for the production designation
object (in case this is provided by the project and itemized listing).
1.10. Reference of provision of operating staff.
1.11. Reference of provision of material-and-technical resources, power supply, water,
steam, gas, heat, compressed air, waste waters drainage, etc.
1.12. Document on the special water use.
1.13. Certificates on the equipment and mechanisms.
1.14. Acts of acceptance of objects, equipment (mechanisms), and communications issued
Page 261 of 295

by the working committees.
1.15. References issued by the municipal operating organizations confirming that the
external cold and hot water supply, sewerage, heating, gas and power supply, and
communication services provide the normal operation of the object and accepted by them for
rendering services.
1.16. Reference of the real cost of construction with breakdown on the estimates or
approximate estimates’ clauses, signed by the customer, contractor, and design organization.
1.17. Reference of elimination of deficiencies and defects revealed by the working
committees.
2. Documentation to be submitted by the general contractor to the working committee
2.1. On the structures and architecture
2.1.1. Piquet sheets of the tunnel structures.
2.1.2. Working drawings (full set of the construction, architectural, decoration drawings on
the each station and run) with record of correspondence of the real works executed by the
persons responsible for conduction of the CMW. The indicated set of the working drawings is
the executive documentation.
2.1.3. Report of the engineering-and-geological conditions of the construction object.
2.1.4. Sheet of the main applied structures by the types and designation of the object
facilities.
2.1.5. Sheet of basic changes inserted in the working drawings during the construction
process.
2.1.6. Certificates certifying the quality of applied materials, equipment, and goods.
2.1.7. Information regarding the indices of hardness of laid in the structure cast-in-situ and
pre-fabricated concrete and reinforced concrete.
2.1.8. Information regarding the geometrical accuracy of the laid tunnel rings and linings.
2.1.9. Information regarding the defective elements of linings.
2.1.10. Information regarding the settlement of surface in the region of construction of
underground structures.
2.1.11. Protocols of laboratory analysis of chemical composition of ground waters.
2.1.12. Information regarding the used scientific-and-research works and modernizations.
2.1.13. Executive drawings of ready structures.
2.1.14. Topographic plans of the urban territory with inserted technical and protected zones
within the construction objects.
2.2. Documentation on the track and contact rail
2.2.1. Sheet of the tracks length with detailing of lengths of the main line tracks,
connecting track branches leading to the electric depot, parking tracks, tracks in the tunnels
and on the metro-bridges.
2.2.2. Executive drawings of the road bed structures at the above-ground sections. Sheet of
tapping of water pockets and other facilities in the road bed. Sheet of execution of the road
bed and water drainage facilities stabilization.
2.2.3. Acts of handing over of the road bed of the above-ground sections or mounting base
of the tunnel lining under the track laying; sheets of control leveling by the axis and edges of
the road bed, measurements of the road bed width by the top, slopes of drainage surface and
slope grades. Acts of laboratory analysis of the grounds used for the construction of the road
bed. Acts of testing of the compacting degree for the grounds in embankments.
2.2.4. Sheet of the permanent control survey points installed by the general contractor, with
indication of their location and marks.
2.2.5. The track plane and profile with indication of stations, gridiron at the stations,
average and marginal slopes and length of the curve sections in % relating to the total length,
with indication the minimal radius of curvature.
2.2.6. Information regarding the superstructure and contact rail, including the
Page 262 of 295

characteristics of basement, types of cross-ties and other rail seats, rails, length of the rail
strings and method of welding, types of joints, track switches, and other elements.
2.2.7. Sheets of the materials laid in the superstructure by kilometers and by stations, with
indication of the track designation, type of rails, volume and mark of concrete and kind of
ballast, rocks, and quality of the cross-ties’ wood and year of their laying, length of the rail
strings, year of rolled products and number of the rail casting, number of fastening by types
and kinds, as well as type, mark, and number of the track switches.
2.2.8. Sheet of ballast and laid track by kilometers.
2.2.9. Sheet of the superstructure and contact rail materials stock by kilometers, passed to
the operating organization.
2.2.10. Sheet of installed track and signal signs.
2.2.11. Certificates on the superstructure elements, contact rail, track switches, and on the
welding of rail strings and contact rail strings’ joints.
2.2.12. Sheet of the control measurements of position of the rail strings relating to the
control survey points. Certificates of the curve sections with the sheets of measurements of
position of curvature in plane (basic parameters, design and real deflections). Sheet of
elevation of outing rail in the curvature.
2.2.13. Sheet of the protective fencings.
2.2.14. Sheet of the ball evaluation of the track and contact rail conditions by the data of
measurements.
2.3. Documentation on the escalators
2.3.1. Documentation in correspondence with Appendix 7.3.D1.
2.3.2. Executive drawings of the structures
2.4. Documentation on the engineering-and-technical facilities (water drainage, sewerage,
etc).
2.4.1. Certificates on the equipment and mechanisms.
2.4.2. Acts of execution of adjustment works and conduction of testing of the systems with
indication of organizations executing the adjustment and testing.
2.4.3. Acts of passing of the external communications, inputs to the municipal
organizations, and permission for drainage of sewerage and conditionally clean waters to the
municipal networks.
2.4.4. Acts of testing of fecal reservoirs and water collectors of the drainage systems on
hermiticity, and conduction of hydraulic testing of communications and vessels.
2.4.5. Acts of testing of communications protection from the ground currents.
2.4.6. Acts of measurement of the noise level in premises and tunnels during the work of
the ventilation installations, as well as on the surface – during the work of tunnel ventilation
installations.
2.4.7. Information regarding the taken measures on reduction of the ventilators’ noise
level.
2.4.8. Acts of testing of the demounting facilities.
2.4.9. Sheet of spare parts and reserve equipment passed to the operating organization.
2.5. Documentation on the electrotechnical facilities
2.5.1. Certificates on equipment.
2.5.2. Document on distribution of the feeding cable networks’ operation between the
power supply organizations and Underground Railroad.
2.5.3. Reference of taking of the provided by the project measures on protection from the
ground currents and electrochemical corrosion.
2.5.4. Executive documentation on taking of measures on provision of fire safety in the
electrical premises, and protection of the maintenance personnel from the electrical shock.
2.5.5. Executive documentation on taking of measures on the prevention of contact of
underground waters with the equipment in the electrical premises.
Page 263 of 295

2.5.6. Act of execution of adjustment works and high-voltage testing of equipment and
cables with indication of organizations executing the adjustment and testing.
2.6. Documentation on the train traffic control facilities and communication
2.6.1. Certificates on the equipment.
2.6.2. Acts of execution of adjustment works and testing of the TTC facilities
communication.
2.7. Documentation on the traffic organization
2.7.1. Acts of running of trial train, of running of rolling stocks, track and facilities.
2.7.2. Act of execution of adjustment works and testing of the automated train driving
facilities and automated station doors at the trial train traffic.
2.8. Documentation on the fire safety
2.8.1. Information regarding the fire safety systems by objects included in the acts of
acceptance committees.
2.8.2. Acts of commissioning of the fire protection systems.
2.9. Information regarding the changes and additions inserted in the design and estimate
documentation in correspondence with decisions of approving authorities.
APPENDIX 7B
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE OF THE READINESS OF COMPLETED
CONSTRUCTION OBJECT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of object, structure)

FOR CONSIDERATION BY THE STATE ACCEPTANCE COMMITTEE
«____» _________________ 200___ year
Working committee, appointed by ____________________________________________
(name of organization-customer appointing the working committee)

According to the decision dated «____» _______________ 200___ year № _____ in
composition of:
chairman-representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Members of committee – representatives of:
general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor (mounting) organizations ___________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer ____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision _______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

paramilitary fire-fighting unit of the Underground Railroad ________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

State inspection on the labor safety ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities of supervision and organizations _____________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

STATED:
1. The general contractor ________________________________________________
(name of organization)

Page 264 of 295

Has submitted to the commissioning the completed by the construction
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of object, structure)

Included in the composition of_________________________________________________
(name of object)

2. The construction has been conducted by the general contractor executed
___________________
(kinds of works)

And its subcontractor organizations _________________________________________
(name of organizations)

executed ___________________________.
(kinds of works)

3. The design and estimate documentation on the construction has been elaborated by the
design organizations __________________________________________________________
(name of organizations)

4. Construction has been executed according to the project ______________
(project number)

5. The design and estimate documentation has been approved by_____________________
(name of authority approved the documentation)

«_____» ___________________ 200___ year № __________
6. The construction-and-mounting works have been executed during the period:
Start of works _______________ end of works_______________.
(month and year)

7. The following documentation
committee:__________________

(month and year)

has

been

submitted

to

the

working

(list according to the Appendix 7А).

The indicated documents are mandatory appendix to the present act.
8. The object, structure has the following technical-and-economic
________________________

indices:

(list).

9. The technological and architectural-and-construction solutions on the object, structure
are characterized by the following data: _____________________________________
(length, main materials and structures, engineering and

_________________________________________________________________________
technological equipment, traffic and carriage capacity, etc.)

10. The equipment has been installed according to the acts of its acceptance after the
individual and complex testing by the working subcommittees. The list of indicated acts is
represented in the appendix to the acts of the working subcommittees.
11. The labor, explosion, fire safety, environmental protection, and anti-seismic measures
provided by the project have been executed in full volume.
12. Deficiencies revealed by the working subcommittees should be eliminated before the
submission of the ready object, structure to the State acceptance committee.
13. The cost estimate according to the approved design and estimate documentation:
totally ___________________ million rubles, including:
construction-and-mounting works ______________________ million rubles,
equipment, instrumentation, inventory ______________________ million rubles.
Real execution from the beginning of the construction:
totally: ____________________ million rubles, including:
construction-and-mounting works ______________________ million rubles,
equipment, instrumentation, inventory ______________________ million rubles.
CONCLUSION OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE
Page 265 of 295

The object, structure ______________________________________________________
(name of object, structure)

Is ACCEPTED from the general contractor and ready for consideration by the State
acceptance committee.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7B
(mandatory)
APPROVED
_________________________________
date and number of decision (order, statement, etc)

_________________________________
position, surname, n.p. of the person

_________________________________
signed the decision (order, statement)

ACT
OF THE STATE ACCEPTANCE COMMITTEE OF THE COMMISSIONING OF
COMPLETED CONSTRUCTION OBJECT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of object, structure)

«_____» __________________ 200___ year
The State acceptance committee appointed by the decision _________________
(order, statement, etc)

dated «_____» ________________ 200___ year № ______________________________.
(name of authority appointed the committee)

In the composition of:
chairman ____________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

members of committee-representatives of:
customer operating organization ___________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the ecological supervision ________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

state inspection on the labor safety_________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Other interested authorities and organizations _____________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Taking into consideration the requirements of the SNiP 32-02,
STATED:
1. The customer ___________________________________________________________
(contractor together with the customer)

_______________________________________________________________________
(name of organization)

Submitted for the commissioning __________________________________________
Page 266 of 295

(name of object)

2. The construction has been executed on the base of decision ______________________
(order, statement, etc)

dated «____» __________________ 200___ year № ______________________________
(name of authority taking the decision)

3. The construction has been executed general contractor_____________________
(name of organization)

conducted ___________________________________________________________
(kinds of works)

and subcontractor organizations __________________________________________
(name of organizations, kind of works executed by the each organization.
In case the number of organizations exceeds three, their list should be indicated in the appendix to the act)

4. The design and estimate documentation on the construction has been elaborated by the
general designer _________________________________________________________
(name of organization)

executed _____________________________________________________________
(name of parts or sections of documentation)

and subcontractor organizations ____________________________________________
(name of organizations, parts or sections of documentation,
executed by the each organization. In case the number of organizations
exceeds three, their list should be indicated in the appendix to the act).

5. The initial data for designing is given by _____________________________
(name of the scientific-and-research and surveying organizations,
subject of the initial data. In case the number of organizations exceeds three,
their list should be indicated in the appendix to the act).

6. The construction has been executed according to the project (feasibility study, design)
______________.
(number of project)

7. Design and estimate documentation has been approved by _______________________
(name of authority approved,
re-approved the documentation on the object)

«____» ___________________ 200___ year № ________________________________
8. Construction-and-mounting works have been executed during the period:
Start of works _______________ end of works_______________.
(month and year)

(month and year)

At the duration of the construction, months:
According to the standard or COP ____________ real ____________
(month and year)

(month and year)

9. The following documentation has been submitted to the State acceptance
committee:__________________
(list according to the Appendix 7А).

10. The object submitted for the commissioning has the following main indices:
_______________________________________________________________
(power, length, traffic and carriage capacity, traffic speed, amount of the materials used for the construction - concrete,
reinforced concrete, cast iron, etc, length of track and
contact rail, etc, in tabular form with indication of design and real indices)

11. The architectural-and-construction and technological solutions by the object are
characterized with the following data: ______________________________________
(short technical characteristics of specifics of its location, planning,
main materials and structures, engineering and technological
equipment)

Page 267 of 295

12. The provided by the project equipment has been installed at the object in the amount
of
__________________________________________________________________________
(according to the acts of working subcommittees of its acceptance after individual testing and complex testing)

13. The labor safety, explosion and fire safety, environmental protection, and anti-seismic
measures provided by the project have been taken and represented in the appendix to the
present act.
14. The external networks of cold and hot water supply, sewerage, heating, gas and power
supply, and communication provide the normal operation of the object and accepted by the
municipal operating organizations.
15. The deficiencies and defects revealed by the working committee have been eliminated.
16. The cost estimate according to the approved design and estimate documentation:
totally ___________________ million rubles, including:
construction-and-mounting works ______________________ million rubles,
equipment, instrumentation, inventory ______________________ million rubles.
Real execution from the beginning of the construction:
totally: ____________________ million rubles, including:
construction-and-mounting works ______________________ million rubles,
equipment, instrumentation, inventory ______________________ million rubles.
17. The cost estimate of the commissioning assets: _________________ million rubles,
including:
construction-and-mounting works ______________________ million rubles,
equipment, instrumentation, inventory ______________________ million rubles.
CONCLUSION OF THE STATE ACCEPTANCE COMMITTEE
The submitted for commissioning ___________________________
(name of object)

TO BE PUT INTO OPERATION from «_____» ________________ 200___ year.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7D
(mandatory)
LINE CERTIFICATE
1. General provisions
1.1. The line certificate should contain the basic construction and operating parameters of
the completed Underground Railroad line and its constituent parts characterizing the
conditions and capabilities of the passengers’ carriage.
The certificate should reflect as well the parameters of the underground line at the usage of
its facilities as the shelter for population in the civil defense and emergency situation regimes.
The values of represented indices should correspond to the approved project
documentation and, where appropriate, executive documentation.
1.2. It is allowed not to indicate in the certificate parameters of separate structures and
engineering-technical installations providing realization of the basic operating indices listed
below in the corresponding tables.
1.3. For the Underground Railroad objects connected with operation of several lines the
separate certificates should be compiled.
1.4. The certificate should contain the information of the newly applied technical solutions,
of the solutions protected by patents or licenses (with reference on these documents), as well
as of the solutions realized with deviations from the effective standards, with attachment,
where appropriate, the substantiating documents.
1.5. At the change of basic operating parameters in the result of extension or reconstruction
of the Underground Railroad line objects the corresponding data should be inserted in the
certificate by means of compiling of inlays. Availability of inlays should be reflected in the
Page 268 of 295

certificate contents.
1.6. It is recommended to compile the certificate in the tabular form according to the
indicated below. The separate technical parameters, as well as necessary explanations given in
the text form, can be passed to the appendices. According to the customer decision the
composition of certificate can be increased with insertion of additional parameters.
1.7. The composition of certificate should include the list of all organizations participating
in the designing and construction of the line, with reflection of requisites of organizations,
surnames of their administrators (head, chief engineer), objects of construction and scope of
executed works.
1.8. The certificate should be signed by the heads of general design and construction
organizations, and operating organization.
______________________________
(name of the Underground Railroad)

CERTIFICATE
___________________________________
(name of the line or line section)

Name of organization; position, surname, n.p., and signature of the head of organization; date
of signing; stamp
design
construction
operating
City
year
Basic parameters of the line
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of the line or line section)

Table 1
Name
Parameter
1. Scheme of the line
Appendix
2. Date of putting into operation (day, month, year)
3. Operating length in the double-line calculation, km
4. Traffic capacity during the first period of operation:
Pair trains per hour
Cars in the train
5. Design traffic capacity in perspective:
Pair trains per hour
Cars in the train
6. Carriage capacity, thousand passengers per hour:
During the first period of operation
Design in perspective
7. Rolling stock (series №)
8. Line bedding: (length of underground, above-ground, ground sections, km, can be reflected on the scheme)
9. Number of stations, including the ones with gridiron and interchange
10. Superstructure (type of rails and rail seats)
11. External power supply system (scheme, power consumption, voltage)
Appendix
12. Engineering-and-technical installations:
Tunnel ventilation system (scheme, TVI capacity)
Main water-removing plants (number, capacity)
Firefighting water pipeline (water consumption in the fire extinguishing mode)
13. Control systems:
Composition of the line dispatcher point (list of field DP)
Train traffic control (kinds of systems and main funstions)
Control of the engineering-and-technical installations (control types)
Communication (main kinds by groups)
14. Electric depot
15. Operating personnel premises
16. Regulatory base (list of main regulatory documents corresponding to the Appendix
Page 269 of 295

Name
Parameter
constructed line)
17. List of the main technical solutions: newly applied, protected by patents and Appendix
licenses, realized with deviations from the effective standards with indication of
substantiating documents
18. Act of the State acceptance committee
Appendix
19. List of organizations participating in the designing and construction
Appendix

Basic parameters of the station
________________________________________________________________________
(name of the station)

T a b l e 2а

*

Name
Parameter
1. Postal address
2. Date of putting into operation (day, month, year)
3. Spatial-and-planning scheme reflecting the georeferencing, bedding (underground, Appendix
ground, above-ground), type of vestibule (underground, above-ground), availability of
interchange structures
4. Number of escalators, elevators, lifting platforms for disabled people
5. Carriage capacity during the first period of operation, thousand passengers per hour
6. The same, in perspective
7. Realized traffic capacity (pair trains per hour) in the emergency mode (at the TSS
failure)
8. Technical police and safety facilities (tele-monitoring, signalization, protection Appendix
from intrusion, environmental parameters reading sensors, etc)
9. Technical fire safety and air parameters control facilities
10. Information according to the clause 17 of the Table 1
Appendix
*
The table should be compiled for the each station under the numbers 2b, 2c, etc

Basic parameters of additional structures and facilities
________________________________________________________________________
(name of the line or line section)

T a b l e 3а*
Name
1. Scheme of the line section adapted under the shelter reflecting the length of bays,
defended population, thousand people, location and short characteristics of the living
facilities
2. Information according to the clause 17 of the Table 1
*
The table should be compiled for the each station under the numbers 3b, 3c, etc

Parameter

Appendix

Basic parameters of electric depot
________________________________________________________________________
(name)

Table 4
Name
Parameter
1. Postal address
2. Date of putting into operation (day, month, year)
3. General layout with georeferencing, with indication of area and legend of the Appendix
structures during the first period of operation and in perspective
4. List of the main structures with indication of their basic parameters by designation Appendix
(number of floors, area, number of tracks, capacity, technical equipment, scope of
executed works, etc)
5. Technical police and safety facilities (tele-monitoring, signalization, protection Appendix
from intrusion, environmental parameters reading sensors, kinds of communication
etc)
6. Technical fire safety facilities
7. Information according to the clause 17 of the Table 1
Appendix

Basic parameters of the operating personnel premises
____________________________________________________________________
(name of the line or line section)

Page 270 of 295

Table 5
Name
Показатель
1. Postal address
2. Date of putting into operation (day, month, year)
3. General layout with georeferencing
Appendix
4. Characteristics of buildings (number of floors, area, list of the main premises, Appendix
composition of accommodated personnel, etc)
5. Engineering-and-technical equipment (number of elevators, power supply,
communication, air conditioning, etc)
6. Technical police and safety facilities (tele-monitoring, signalization, protection Appendix
from intrusion, etc)
7. Technical fire safety facilities
8. Information according to the clause 17 of the Table 1
Appendix

APPENDIX 7.2А
(recommended)
Construction ______________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
of execution of mining works
Shift
Worker
number,
specialties,
Volume of
description
Number of
Date
team
executed
of
workers
foreman
work
executed
surname
works
1
2
3
4
5

Signatures
shift
turned
over

Notes and
Marks of
recommendations execution of
shift taken
on the works
notes and
over
quality
recommendations

6

7

8

9

N o t e – The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager,
executed work volumes should be indicated by the each working place, the log-book should contain information
regarding the conditions of the headings, shoring, water drainage, ventilation, etc, shutdown of mechanisms,
accidents, failures, and production disorders should be reflected with indication of reasons and taken measures
with reference on the compiles acts; in the description of executed works the quality evaluation should be given.

APPENDIX 7.2B
(mandatory)
Construction __________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
of execution of concrete and reinforced concrete works
Number of
Concrete
Number
bill of
testing results
Signatures
of
materials,
Amount
of the
Нstart and Stripping of
At the On
Name of drawing,
Air
Shift,
mark,
Concrete
of
shift
end of formworks
stripping the
structure, mark of
temperature
team
composition, compacting
concrete
engineer Note
concreting
of
28th
place of concrete
at the
executed
and
method
per shift, formworks day
and
laying according
laying, °С
the work
3
flowability
m
section
to the
of the laid
manager
project
concrete
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Date

N o t e – The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager.

Page 271 of 295

APPENDIX 7.2C
(mandatory)
Construction ___________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
of execution of works on hermetization of pre-fabricated tunnel lining at the closed method of works
Hermetization of bolted holes using the
asbestos-and-bitumen or sevilen washers
Hermetization of injection holes
(testing of bolt sets)
Executed Accepted
Executed
Number
Date Number
by the
by the Number
Number of by the
of
of ring Number
team
shift
of ring Number certificate
team
washers
and of liner
foreman, engineer, and
of liner on sets and foreman,
or set
piquet
initials, initials, piquet
materials
initials,
certificate
signature signature
signature
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Calking or plugging of grooves of the reinforced
concrete linings
Accepted
Material Executed
by the
Number
of calking by the
shift
of ring Number
and
team
engineer,
and
of liner number of foreman,
initials,
piquet
its
initials,
signature
certificate signature
11
12
13
14
15

Notes given
by the quality
Accepted inspectors and
marks
by the
regarding
shift
engineer, elimination of
defect
initials,
signature
16
17

N o t e - The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager.

Page 272 of 295

APPENDIX 7.2D
(recommended)
Construction ___________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
of initial injection of combo solution under the lining
Place of
installation of
Amount
Sort
Signatures
Type of
injector
and
Shift, team of the shift
Name of
equipment,
Date
executed the engineer Note
Number Number mark
structure
Blocks pressure,
work
and section
of ring of block of
Cement,
Solution
(liners), kgf/cm2
manager
and
(liner) cement
m3
pcs
piquet or tube
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

N o t e - The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager;
the calculation of blocks (liners) in rings should be conducted clockwise upward the piquets, beginning from the
key-block; registration of the cement for repeatedly-control injection should be conducted according to the bills
of materials.

APPENDIX 7.2E
(recommended)
Construction ___________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
on control injection of the slurry under the lining

Date

Name of
structure

1

2

Place of
installation of
Amount
Signatures
Type of
injector
Sort and
Shift, team of the shift
equipment,
executed the engineer Note
Number Number mark of
pressure,
work
and section
of ring of block cement
Cement,
Blocks
2
kgf/cm
Solution
manager
and
(liner) or
m3
(liners), pcs
piquet
tube
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

N o t e - The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager; the calculation
of blocks (liners) in rings should be conducted clockwise upward the piquets, beginning from the key-block; registration of
the cement for repeatedly-control injection should be conducted according to the bills of materials.

APPENDIX 7.2F
(mandatory)
Construction ___________________________________________________________
(name of object, section)

Log-book
of execution of works on the glued water-proofing
Number
Name of
Amount
Signatures
of
Number Number Temperature
structure, place
of water- Shift, team of the shift
certificate of rolled
of
of bitumen
Date
of gluing
proofing executed the engineer
of the material bitumen or gluing,
(trough, wall,
per shift,
work
and section
rolled
layers certificate
°С
floor)
m2
manager
material
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Note

10

N o t e - The log-book should be filled in by the shift engineer and should be kept by the section manager.
Page 273 of 295

APPENDIX 7.2G
(mandatory)
ACT
OF CONCEALED WORKS EXECUTION
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of works)

Executed at ___________________________________________________________
(name of the construction object)

«____» _______________ 200__ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Construction-and-mounting organization ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical supervision customer ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

design organization __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the inspection of works executed by __________________________________
(name of the construction-and-mounting organization)

and drawn up the act regarding the following:
1. The following works have been submitted for inspection and acceptance __________
(name of concealed works)

2. The works have been executed according to the project __________________________
(name of design organization, № of drawings and date of their issue)

3. During the execution of works applied ______________________________________
(name of materials, structure, goods,

_______________________________________________________________________
with indication of mark, type, category of quality, etc)

4. Date:
Start of works ___________
(month and year)

End of works___________
(month and year)

Conclusion of the committee
The works have been executed in correspondence with (or with deviations) the project,
standards, construction standards and regulations, and meet (not meet) the requirements of
their acceptance.
The works submitted to acceptance indicated in the clause 1 of the present act are accepted
(not accepted) with the quality evaluation _____________________
On the base of mentioned above the execution of subsequent works on the arrangement
(mounting) of ____________________________ is allowed (not allowed until the
(name of works and structures)

deficiencies indicated in the appendix will be eliminated)
Appendix – list of deficiencies and recommendations on their elimination
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7.2H
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF WORKS ON ARRANGEMENT OF THE GLUED (OR
WELDED) WATER-PROOFING
Executed by __________________________________________________________
(name of the structure, object)

Page 274 of 295

«____» ___________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of:
representatives of construction-and-mounting organization: ________________________
(name of organization)

Chief engineer ______________________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Section engineer ______________________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Surveyor ___________________________________________________________
(position, surname, n.p.)

Representative of technical supervision of customer ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted inspection of works executed by _____________________________________
(name of the construction-and-mounting organization)

and drawn up the act regarding the following:
1. The works on glued or welded water-proofing (delete as applicable) have been
submitted for inspection and acceptance at____________________________________
(name of structure)

Place of gluing

From piquet to
piquet

Length,
m

At the height
(width), m

Area, m2

Note

Vault
Right wall
Lest wall
Trough
End
Totally

Number of layers ___________
The gluing has been executed by the team ______________________________________
(team foreman surname, n.p.)

Under the control _______________________________________________________
(position, surname, n.p.)

2. The works have been executed according to the project__________________________
(name of design organization, № of drawings and date of their issue)

3. At the execution of works applied:
- rolled material _____________________________________________________
(name)

From the batch passed the laboratory testing № ________________________ dated «_____»
_______________ 200___ year
- bitumen of the ___________ mark from the batch passed the laboratory testing № _____
dated «____» __________ 200__ year
The temperature of gluing mastic according to the results of measuring at the working
place, °С:
The highest _____
The lowest _____
Conclusion of the committee
The works have been executed in correspondence with the design and estimate
documentation, construction standards and regulations, and meet the requirements of their
acceptance.
On the base of mentioned above the execution of the subsequent works on the
arrangement (mounting) is allowed
_________________________________________________________________________
Page 275 of 295

(name of works)

Signatures:

APPENDIX 7.2I
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF WORKS ON INJECTION OF SOLUTION UNDER THE
LINING
Executed at __________________________________________________________
(name of the structure, object)

«_____» ________________ 200__ year
Committee in the composition of:
representatives of construction-and-mounting organization: _____________________
(name of organization)

Chief engineer ______________________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Section engineer ______________________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Surveyor ___________________________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

Representative of technical supervision customer ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted inspection of works executed by _____________________________________
(name of the construction-and-mounting organization)

And drawn up the present act regarding the following:
1. The works submitted for inspection and acceptance:
- on the initial, control injection (delete as applicable) under the pre-fabricated lining from
the ring № _____ to the ring № _____, totally rings _____;
- under the cast-in-situ concrete lining from piquet ____ to piquet ____ at the length of
____ m. Totally ____ m3.
The injection has been conducted using the pump of the ____ type, and has ended at the
pressure of ____ atm by the pressure gauge.
The works have been executed by the team ____________________________________
(team foreman surname, n.p.)

Under the control of foreman _______________________________________________
(surname, n.p.)

2. Работы выполнены по проекту __________________________________________
(name of design organization, № of drawings and date of their issue)

3. При выполнении работ применены _______________________________________
(name of materials with indication of mark, category of quality, etc)

4. Date:
Start of works __________ (month and year), end of works __________ (month and
year).
Conclusion of the committee
The works have been executed in correspondence with the design, standards, construction
standards and regulations, and meet the requirements of their acceptance.
The works submitted to acceptance indicated in the clause 1 of the present act are accepted
with the quality evaluation
On the base of mentioned above the execution of the subsequent works on the
arrangement (mounting) is allowed_____________________________________________
(name of works and structures)

Page 276 of 295

N o t e – injection under the lining should be accepted without the trough section. Injection into the trough
section should be considered and accepted at the preparation of trough to laying of the rigid foundation of track.

Signatures:

APPENDIX 7.2J
(mandatory)
ACT
OF INSPECTION OF SAFETY MARGINS FOR THE TUNNEL EQUIPMENT
________________________________________________________________________
(name of the structure, object)

«____» _________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of:
chairman-representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Members of committee:
representative of general contractor ____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Chief engineers of construction and mounting
organizations ____________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Chief surveyors of construction and mounting
organizations ____________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Representatives of operating and
other interested organizations ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

from _____ hour _____ min to _____ hour _____ min conducted the inspection of the
safety margins of the tunnel equipment at________________________________ from the
(name of the structure, object)

piquet _____ to the piquet ___________________________
(numbers of piquets by the each tunnel)

by the running of clearance trolley with facilities registering deviations from design
dimensions.
The revealed deviations of the safety margins of equipment have been eliminated on the
base of directives issued by the.
The committee states the correspondence of the safety margins of the tunnel equipment
_________________________________________________________________
(name of inspected structures, objects with indication of piquets by the each tunnel)

The the requirements of the GOST 23961 and considers the mentioned structure as ready to
the permanent operation.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7.2K
(mandatory)
DIRECTIVE
OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE
_________________________________________________________________________
(name)

REGARDING THE CORRECTION OF DEVIATIONS OF THE TUNNEL
EQUIPMENT FROM THE SAFETY MARGINS
на ____________________________________________________________________
(name of line)

«____» ___________________ 200___ year
It is proposed to execute the works on elimination of deviations from the margins in
Page 277 of 295

correspondence with the mentioned below list.
List of places with deviations

Mark regarding the execution of
works on elimination of deviation

Executor of works (position,
surname, signature)

The directive with marks regarding the execution of works should be submitted to the
working committee before ________.
(date)

Issued by:
Chairman of the working committee __________________________________________.
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Received by:
Chief (chief engineer) of the CMM
(construction and mounting management) ______________________________________.
(name of organization, фамилия, и.о.)

The works on elimination of deviations have been executed in full volume:
Chief (chief engineer) of the CMM _______________________________________.
(name of organization, фамилия, и.о.)

Chief surveyor of the CMM _______________________________________________.
(name of organization, фамилия, и.о.)

APPENDIX 7.3А
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE REGARDING THE ACCEPTANCE OF
EQUIPMENT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, structure, object)

AFTER INDIVIDUAL TESTING
«____» _______________ 200___ year
Working committee appointed by____________________________________________
(name of the organization-customer appointing the working committee)

According to the decision dated «____» _________________ 200___ year № _____ in
the composition of
chairman-representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

members of committee-representatives:
subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Other interested authorities of
supervision and organizations _______________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

stated:
1. The equipment: ________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, aggregate)

Is mounted at _________________________________________________________
(name of the structure)

Included in the composition of________________________________________________
Page 278 of 295

(name of object, its stage, startup complex)

2. The mounting works have been executed by _________________________________
(name of mounting organizations)

3. The project documentation has been elaborated by _____________________________
(names of design organizations, numbers of drawings, dates of issue)

4. Date of start of the mounting works ________, end of the mounting works ________
(month and year)

(month and year)

5. The working committee conducted the following additional testing of the equipment
(except for the testing registered in the executive documentation represented by the general
contractor): ___________________________________________
(name of testing)

Conclusion of the working committee:
The works on mounting of the submitted equipment have been executed in
correspondence with the design, standards, construction standards and regulations, technical
conditions, and meet the requirements of their acceptance for complex testing.
The submitted equipment indicated in the clause 1 of the present act is accepted from
«____» _________ 200__ year for complex testing.
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3B
(mandatory)
ACT
OF THE WORKING COMMITTEE REGARDING THE ACCEPTANCE OF
EQUIPMENT
________________________________________________________________________
(name equipment, сооружения, объекта)

AFTER COMPLEX TESTING
«____» ________________ 200___ year
Working committee appointed by ____________________________________________
(name of organization appointing the working committee)

According to the decision dated «____» _________________ 200___ year № _____ in
the composition of:
chairman-representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

members of committee-representatives:
general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

technical labor inspection of the customer trade union __________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Page 279 of 295

Other interested authorities of supervision and organizations ______________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

stated:
1. The equipment ________________________________________________________
(name of equipment, installation, aggregate is indicated, where appropriate, in the appendix to the act)

Is mounted by _________________________________________________________
(name of the structure, installation, object)

Included in the composition of________________________________________________
(name of object, its stage, startup complex)

Have passed the complex testing including the necessary startup and adjustment works
together with communications from «_____» ________________ 200___ year to «___»
____________ 200___ year during ____________ in correspondence with established by the
(days or hours)

customer order and according to the _____________________________________________
(name of document according to which the testing has been conducted)

2. The complex testing including the necessary startup and adjustment works have been
executed by ________________________________________________________________
(name of organization-customer, organization conducted the startup and adjustment)

3. During the process of complex testing the additional works indicated in the appendix to
the act have been executed.
Conclusion of the working committee
The equipment passed the complex testing are ready to operation provided by the project
in the volume corresponding to the standards of the initial period of reaching the projected
production capacity, and is accepted from «_____» ________________ 200___ year for
commissioning by the state acceptance committee.
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.C1
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF INTERNAL DOMESTIC-AND-FIRE EXTINGUISHING
AND HOT WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS
________________________________________________________________________
(name os system, installation, object)

«____» ___________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
Page 280 of 295

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities of supervision and organizations ______________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted inspection and acceptance of ________________________________________
(name of the water supply system, installation, object)

on the effect of action and stated:
1. The installed equipment ___________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

and mounting of internal systems correspond to the project documentation.
2. The systems have been tested by the hydraulic pressure of ______ МPа, the acts _____
dated «____» __________ 200___ year
3. At the testing of the internal water pipeline systems on the effect of action it was stated
that the cold and hot water was supplied normally to all water intake points (combination
faucets, valves), the leakage in the pipelines and through the combination faucets, valves, and
flushing facilities was not revealed.
4. The cold and hot water meters have been passed to the operating organization.
Conclusion of the committee
On the base of conducted inspection and testings the internal domestic-and-fire
extinguishing and hot water supply system submitted to hand over is accepted for adjustmen,
putting into operation (delete as applicable).
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.C1-1
(mandatory)
ACT
OF TESTING OF THE INTERNAL FIRE EXTINGUISHING WATER PIPELINE ON
THE WATER YIELD
________________________________________________________________________
(name of object)

«____» _______________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
field supervision ______________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

техsupervision customer ____________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor (mounting) organization ____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested organizations ______________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Conducted the testing of ____________________________________________________
(name of the water supply system, installation, object)

on the water yield.
Testing results
Page 281 of 295

Structure, location of
the fire cocks

Without the boosting pump
Length
Fire hose
Water
of
Pressure,
consumption,
stream,
kgf/cm2
l/s
m

With the boosting pump
Number
Length
Fire hose
Water
of
of
Pressure,
consumption,
streams
stream,
2
kgf/cm
l/s
m

Notes: ________________
(list)

The committee concluded:
The water yield of the internal fire extinguishing water pipeline corresponds to the
requirements of the project documentation.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7.3.C2
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF HEATING SYSTEM
________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

«____» ___________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities of supervision and organizations ______________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

conducted the inspection of effectiveness of action and acceptance of the heating system
__________________________________________________________________________
(name and short characteristics)

mounted at ______________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

and stated:
1. The installed equipment ___________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

And mounting of the internal systems correspond to the project documentation.
2. The expansion vessel is installed _________________ isolated and provided with
(indicate the place)

automation of feed-in.
3. The heating systems have been tested by the hydraulic of _____ МPа, acts _____ dated
«____» _______________ 200___ year
4. The testing on the effect of action showed that at the environmental air temperature of
Page 282 of 295

_____ °С the temperature of supplied water at the regulation units _____ °С, the temperature
of recirculating water _____ °С, circulation head _____ m, herewith all devices of the
heating system showed the even warming. The temperature in the internal premises _____
°С.
Conclusion of the committee:
On the base of conducted inspection and testing the heating system submitted to the
handover to be taken to adjustment, to be put into operation (delete as applicable).
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.C3
(mandatory)

ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND DISCHARGES OF THE INTERNAL
SEWERAGE
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

«____» ___________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities supervision и organizations _____________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

conducted the inspection and commissioning of the system and discharges of the internal
sewerage ______________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

and stated:
1. The system mounting corresponds to the project documentation.
2. At the testing on the effect of action the serviceability of pipelines, operation of sanitary
devices and flushing facilities has been tested by the water spillage; leakage in the connection
places and in the flush tanks has not been revealed. The waste waters are drained normally.
Conclusion of the committee:
On the base of conducted inspection and testing the internal sewerage system submitted to
the hand over to be taken to adjustment, to be put into operation (delete as applicable).
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.C4
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF THE SYSTEM AND DISCHARGES OF THE INTERNAL
Page 283 of 295

DRAIN
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

«____» __________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer ______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer_____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities of supervision and organizations ______________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

conducted the inspection and acceptance of the internal water drain and discharge system
________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

and stated:
1. The arrangement of the water drain corresponds to the project documentation.
2. At the testing of internal water drainage networks by the filling with water to the level
of highest hopper head during 10 min the leakage of water has not been revealed. The waste
waters are drained normally.
Conclusion of the committee:
On the base of conducted inspection and testing the internal water drainage system
submitted to the handover to be taken to adjustment, to be put into operation (delete as
applicable).
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.C5
(mandatory)
ACT
OF ACCEPTANCE OF LIGHTING INSTALLATIONS
________________________________________________________________________
(name of installation, object)

«____» ________________ 200__ year
Committee in the composition of representatives:
Customer _______________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general contractor __________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization _____________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

general designer______________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Page 284 of 295

authorities of the state sanitary supervision ______________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

authorities of the state fire safety supervision ________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities of supervision and organizations ______________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

conducted the acceptance of the lighting installation and measurement of illuminance in the
premises _________________________________________________________________
(name of premises)

___________________________________________________________________________
(short characteristics of LI, type and number of device)

at the network voltage сети in the beginning of the measurements _____ V, in the end of the
measurements ___ V, and stated: conditions of the lighting installation, composition of LI and
its mounting correspond to the working documentation, the results of measurements are
represented in the table. The measurements have been conducted according to the GOST
24940.

Illuminance, lx
Plane of
Place of
measured
real
critical
measurement
Conclusion
Control measurement,
(horiz.-vert.regarding the
Combined
Combined
Combined
point
name of
inclin.),
lighting
lighting
lighting
Common
Common
Common correspondence
№
working
height from
lighting
lighting
lighting to standards
Common
Common
Common
surface
Common
Common
the floor Common and local
and local
and local

N o t e – Real illuminance is defined taking into consideration application of correction factors to the measured illuminance: К1 is the
spectral composition of the light source according to the Table 5 of the Recommendations [10], К2 is the calibration factor of the luxmeter
scales, and К3 is the factor of safety of the lighting installation according to the Recommendations [10].

Conclusion of the committee:
On the base of conducted inspection and measurements the lighting installation submitted
to the commissioning to be put into operation.
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3.D1
(recommended)
LIST
OF DOCUMENTS FOR THE ESCALATORS COMMISSIONING
1. Act of technical readiness of escalator
Form and filling
2. Escalator certificate
according to the PB 10-77
3. Act of acceptance of escalator
4. Documentation supplied with escalator
according to the PB 10-77
5. Act of correspondence to the requirements of fire safety
Appendix 7.3.D2
6. Protocol of surveying measurements of
installation of guides of the staircases
Appendix 7.3.D3
7. Picking list of the hauling chains, installed at the escalators
Appendix 7.3.D4
8. Act of testing of the hoisting-and-conveying equipment
Appendix 7.3.D5
9. Protocol of testing of the electrical power equipment
insulation resistance for the electrical, control, and
signalization circuits, power and lighting wiring
Appendix 6.10.B6
10. Protocol of inspection and testing of the equipment grounding,
Page 285 of 295

Including the balustrade made from metal sheets
Appendix 6.10.57
11. Acts of acceptance of concealed works
Appendix 7.2G
APPENDIX 7.3.D2
(mandatory)
ACT
OF CORRESPONDENCE OF ESCALATOR TO THE FIRE SAFETY
REQUIREMENTS
________________________________________________________________________
(type, part №)

________________________________________________________________________
(place of installation, object)

«____» ________________ 200___ year
We, undersigned, representative of organization mounted the escalator
__________________________________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

Permission for mounting dated _____________ issued by _____________ and representative
(day, month, year)

of the state fire safety supervision _________________________________________
(name of authority, position, surname, n.p.)

have drawn up the present act regarding the following: inspection and testing of
correspondence of the escalator ________________________________
(type, part №, place of installation, object)

to
the
fire
safety
requirements
in
the
__________________________________________________________________

volume

(name of regulatory document)

The escalator and its constituent parts have passed the inspection and testing. They meet
the requirements of fire safety, have corresponding fire safety certificates, and ready to the
commissioning.
Signatures:
APPENDIX 7.3.D3
(mandatory)
PROTOCOL
OF THE SURVEY MEASUREMENTS OF INSTALLATION OF THE ESCALATOR
RUN GUIDES
«____» ______________ 200__ year
Columns №
left

Part number
Guides
Deviations, mm
right

Part number
Guides
Deviations, mm
left
right

CMM surveyor ________________________________________________________
(name of organization, surname, n.p.)

APPENDIX 7.3.D4
(mandatory)
COMPONENT LIST OF HAULING CHAINS INSTALLED AT THE ESCALATOR
___________________________________________________________________________
(type, part №, place of installation, object)

Rail string №

Left
Extension

Accumulation Rail string №

Right
Extension

Accumulation

Difference

Signatures:
Page 286 of 295

Representative of mounting organization
___________________________________

Representative of operating organization
____________________________________

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

«____» ________________ 200___ year
«____» ________________ 200___ year
stamp
stamp
APPENDIX 7.3.D5
(mandatory)
ACT
OF TESTING OF HOISTING-AND-CONVEYING EQUIPMENT (TMP)
________________________________________________________________________
(place of installation)

«____» ________________ 200___ year
TMP ___________________________________________________________________
(list)

of the machine room of escalators ___________________________________________
(type, place of installation, object)

has been tested in correspondence with the «Regulations of arrangement and safety operation
of escalators», technical conditions _______________ and instructions on operation
(TU number)

____________. It is in serviceable conditions, and suitable for operation.
(instruction number)

Representative of mounting organization
Representative of operating organization
__________________________________ ______________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

«____» ________________ 200___ year
«____» ________________ 200___ year
stamp
stamp
APPENDIX 7.3E
(mandatory)
ACT
OF COMMISSIONING OF ADJUSTMENT-FREE EQUIPMENT
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of structure, object)

«____» _________________ 200___ year
Committee in the composition of:
chairman-representative of customer _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

members of committee-representatives:
general contractor _________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

subcontractor mounting organizations _____________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

operating organization ___________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

other interested authorities supervision и organizations _____________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p.)

conducted inspection and testing of works executed by ___________________________
(name of mounting organization)

To commissioning submitted ________________________________________________,
(list, short technical characteristics of submitted equipment)

Mounted according to ________________________________________________________
(№ of drawings, date of their issue, name of design organization)

Page 287 of 295

Start of mounting works __________
(month, year)

End of mounting works __________
(month, year)

The committee has tested___________________________________________________
(list the tests except for the tests registered in the documents attached to the act)

The remaining deficiencies ____ do not prevent the normal operation and subjected to
(list)

elimination _______________________ no later than «___» _______________ 200___ year
(name of mounting organization)

The list of attached to the act acceptance documentation ___________.
Conclusion of the committee:
The equipment indicated in the clause 1 of the present act to be put into operation from
«___» __________ 200___ year
Signatures:
Handed over by:
Accepted by:
representatives of general contractor
representatives of customer:
and subcontractor organizations:
APPENDIX 7.3F
(mandatory)
CERTIFICATE
OF VENTILATION SYSTEM (AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM)
_________________________________________________________________________
(name of system, installation, object)

А General provisions _______________________________________________________
(designation and location of the system equipment)

Б Main technical characteristics of the system equipment
Ventilators
Data

Type

Number

Diameter of
wheel
Drat, mm

Supply,
m3/h

Full
Diameter Rotation
pressure, of sheave, frequency,
Pa
mm
s-1

Design
Real
Note -

Electrical motors
Data

Type

Power, KW

Rotation
frequency, s-1

Diameter of
sheave, mm

Transmission
type

Design
Real
Note -

Air heaters, air coolers, including zonal ones
Scheme
Type
or number Piping of heating or Location by
model
cooling agent
the air

Data

Kind and parameters
of heating or cooling
agent

Testing of the heat
exchangers at the
working pressure
(executed, not
executed)

Design
Real
Note -

Dust and gas catcher
Data

Name

Air
Number Quantity consumption,
m3/h

Leak-in
(exhaust) %

Resistance, Pa

Design

Page 288 of 295

Data

Name

Air
Number Quantity consumption,
m3/h

Leak-in
(exhaust) %

Resistance, Pa

Real
Note -

Air humidifier
Data

Pump
Nozzle
Supply,
Type
pressure,
3
m /h
KPa

Electrical motor
Rotation Characteristics
Power,
Frequency Type
frequency, of humidifier
KW
s-1

Design
Real
Note -

В Air consumption by premises (by network)
Metering cross-section
number

Name of premises

Air consumption, m3/h
real
design

Errors, % (parameter
deviations)

Note -

Г Ventilation (air conditioning) system scheme
N o t e – in the notes to the system elements the revealed deviations from the project documentation and their
coordination with the design organization or elimination measures should be indicated.

Representatives:
customer (startup and adjustment organization) __________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p., signature)

design organization ____________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p., signature)

mounting organization ___________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p., signature)

APPENDIX 7.3G
(recommended)
CONTROL OF THE ELECTRIC CORROSION PREVENTIVE MEASURES
EXECUTION AND EFFECTIVENESS
1. The following should be executed during the acceptance process:
- inspection of the superstructure for revelation of places of connection or contact of the
track rails with structure elements;
- electrical measurements:
а) transient resistance between the track rails and tunnel lining (earthing bus);
б) resistance of conducting and insulating joints of the track rails;
в) resistance of insulating joints of the track rails with IB;
г) conditions of insulating sleeves of cables and flanges of pipelines;
д) availability of galvanic contact between the reinforcement bars of reinforced concrete
blocks, between the reinforcement bars of blocks and earthing bus.
2. Revelation of places of connection or contact of the track rails with structure elements
should be conducted first by the inspection of places and sections of the most probable
connections, and then (after the elimination of revealed connections) by special
measurements.
The most probable places of track rail connections:
а) with the tunnel lining – at the places of location of gates;
б) with pipelines – at the places of their passage under the tracks;
в) with cable sheathes – through the IB outputs and switch point drive structures;
г) with reinforcement bars of trough reinforced concrete blocks – through the free length of
reinforcement bars;
Page 289 of 295

д) with reinforcement bars and details of bridge or overhead road structures – through the
fixing bolts of the superstructure.
To reveal the connections with track rails by the measurement method the 50 - 60 V DC
power supply on the 50 - 100 А current should be inserted instead the middle bus of IB. Using
the portable pointer voltmeter with 10 V range scale and more the difference of potentials
«rail-lining» (earthing bus, structure, etc) should be measured along the tunnel. At the place of
connection the voltmeter reading should be equal to zero.
In case of conduction of measurements at the train traffic the application of DC power
source is not necessary, as the difference of potentials «rail-lining» created by the traction
current should be measured.
Similarly the connections on the metro-bridges, overhead roads, in the electric depot are
defined.
The revelation of damaged insulating inserts in the cross-ties (in case it cannot be made by
inspection) should be conducted by measurement of resistance of the circuit «screw – base
plate - rail» with devices М-416, МС-08, М-1101 (see table). The insert is considered to be
damaged if the measured circuit resistance is equal or close to zero.
3. Measurement of the transient resistance between rails and tunnel lining (earthing bus)
are executed using the resistance meter – device of М-416 or МС-08 (07) type.
The measurement should be conducted by the scheme according to the Figure 1.
The measured rail string is separated from the other rail network by removal of the middle
bus of IB or its isolation with non-metal gaskets.
Type of device
МС-08(07)
М-416
Measuring limit, Ohm
0 - 10
0 - 10
0 - 100
0 - 50
0 - 1000
0 - 200
0 - 1000
Accuracy class
1,5
Error ± 7 %
Power supply
Built-in DC
Three 373, «Mars» elements, or
generator
similar, series-connected
Dimensions, mm
390×195×205
245×140×160
Weight, kg
10,5
3,0
N o t e - Rated voltage of devices at the open circuit - 500 V.
Main technical characteristics

М-1101
0 - 1⋅106
0 - 5⋅109

1,0
Built-in DC
generator
195×130×150
3,6

1 – measuring section rails; 2 – adjacent section rails; 3 – measuring device; 4 – tunnel lining; 5 – removed
middle bus

Figure 1. – track rail transient resistance against the adjacent rail network (а) and tunnel (b)
measurement schemes
The measurements area should not include connected to the middle bus of IB cables of
negative booster lines and inter-track connectors.
The device is connected by one clamp to the middle output of IB of measuring string, by
another – to the middle output of the IB of adjacent rail string (figure 1а). In the tunnels with
cast iron liners another clamp can be connected to the liner or any structure connected with it
Page 290 of 295

by metal (figure 1б). The measurements should be conducted in correspondence with
instruction on the device operation.
The transient resistance of measured rail string should be correlated with 1 km of the track,
Оhm·km, by the formula
RP-T = RизмL / 1000,
where Rизм are the device readings, Оhm;
L is the length of the measuring section, m.
At the measurement of transient resistance of track rails at the sections with one traction
string of track the both rails should be connected by temporary lintel.
4. Measurement of resistance of the conducting joints of track rails should be conducted
using the special joint-meters (for example, ЦНИИ-56 type) by the scheme indicated in the
figure 2, or using two millivoltmeters with measuring limits of 10 - 100 mV – by the scheme
in the figure 3.

joint

rail

accumulator
1 – measuring box of joint-meter; 2 – contact rod; 3 – DC source

Figure 2. – schemes of measurement of track rail assembled joint resistance (а) and testing of
joint-meter (б)

accumulator

Figure 3. – Scheme of measurement of track rail assembled joint resistance by two
millivoltmeters
The 1,2V, 10 А⋅h alkali accumulators are used as the DC sources (for example, two НКМ10 elements, connected in parallel) of other source having sufficient power.
The joint-meter schemes are assembled by the principal of incomplete bridge completed
with two ports at the installation on the track (1m length solid rail and rail joint with two rail
ends, with the total length of 1 m). Zero reading of indicator (bridge is balanced) in the
measuring diagonal of the bridge is achieved by changing of regulated bridge ports. At the
measurement the indicator point should be installed on zero. The count of the measured
resistance of the rail joint id conducted by the position of joy stick at the potentiometer scale.
The measured resistance does not include the resistance of rail ends forming the joint. At the
measurement it is necessary to control the position of joint bars and joint connectors totally
Page 291 of 295

between the end and middle clamps of the rod with the «joint» mark, and keeping of good
contact between the clamps and rail.
At the measurement using two millivoltmeters (figure 3) the resistance of joint in meters of
the rail length is defined by the formula
RCT = U1 / U2 - 1,
where U1 is the voltage drop per 1 m of rail with joint;
U2 is the voltage drop per 1 m of rail without joint.
In this case the synchronous registering of U1 and U2 should be conducted no less than five
times, and should be defined as average value.
5. Measurement of resistance of the isolating joints of rails with IB is executed by two
millivoltmeters (figure 4) with measuring limits: mV1 - 1000-0-1000 and mV2 - 100-0-100
mV.
For measuring the DC source similar with indicated in the clause 4 should be used. At the
short-term connection of the source to the rails simultaneously the voltage drop at the half of
joint (mV1) and at the 1 m length rail (mV2) should be measured. The similar measurements
are executed for the other half of joint (shown with dash line). Then the measurement is
repeated on the other rail.
Resistance of the joint related to the resistance of 1 m rail is defined by the formula
RДС = U1/U2 + U3/U4 - 1,
where U1 and U3 is the voltage drop at the halfs of choke joint for the given rail string;
U2 and U4 is the voltage drop at 1 m rail.
It is allowed to use the special devices for measurements, such as joint-meters.
accumulator

Figure 4. – Scheme of measurement of joint isolation resistance of track rail with IB
6. Measurement of the track rail isolating joint resistance is executed by the circuit «joint
bar-rail» (figure 5) using the auxiliary power source (а) or resistance meter МС-08(07), М416 (б).
At the measurement by the 5а scheme no less than 9 – 10V DC power supply is connected
(for example, two series-connected batteries of КБСЛ-0,5-4,5V type), the current and voltage
in the indicated circuit are measured using the high-resistant device, then the isolation
resistance of the «joint bar-rail» circuit is calculated.
Measurement by the 5б scheme can be conducted using the МС-08(07) or М-416 devices.

Page 292 of 295

accumulator
1 - rail; 2 – joint bar; 3 – isolating structural elements

Figure 5. – Scheme of measurement of the track rail joint isolation resistance
7. Control of the isolating cable sleeves conditions is executed by the schemes according to
the Figure 6. At the train traffic the 6,а scheme is applied, without the train traffic - the 6,б
scheme.

1 - cable; 2 – isolating sleeve; 3 – power source

Figure 6. – Scheme of approximately control of isolating cable sleeve conditions without the
power source (а) and with the power source (б)
The cable between the millivoltmeter connection points should not contact with the
structure elements, brackets, etc. The sleeve is considered to be serviceable if at the мV
device the point is not deviated from the zero position, and the V device registers difference
of potentials. The accuracy of evaluation can be increased using the measurement by the 6,б
scheme with application of 50 – 60V battery.
At the measurement the length of cable sections to which the measuring devices are
connected should be the same.
At the more than 1000V cables the measurement is conducted at the dead working voltage.
8. Control of conditions of insulating flanges on pipelines.
Measurement at the insulating flanges should be conducted according to the Figure 7.

Figure 7. – Scheme of control of conditions of insulating flange with neutral insert (а) and
without insert (б)
The resistance between the neutral insert and external sections of pipelines is measured by
the МС-08(07) or М-416 device. The insulating flanges are considered to be serviceable if the
resistances exceed 10 Ohm. If there is no neutral insert the control of conditions of insulating
flanges should be conducted by the schemes indicated in the clause 7.
Page 293 of 295

9. Definition of galvanic contact between the reinforcement bars of concrete blocks,
between the reinforcement bar and earthing bus.
Availability of galvanic contacts should be defined by the М-416 or МС-08(07) device
according to the Figure 8.
For contact with reinforcement bars the embedded or mounting metal items can be used, or
the concrete can be uncovered for access to the reinforcement bars. Is the measured resistance
is more than zero, there is no galvanic contact.

1 - block; 2 – earthing bus; 3 – embedded items

Figure 8. – Scheme of testing of availability of galvanic contact between the reinforcement
bars of reinforced concrete blocks (Ω1), reinforcement bar and earthing bus (Ω2)
APPENDIX 7.3H
(recommended)
LOG-BOOK
OF THE «RAILS-GROUND» TRANSIENT RESISTANCE MEASUREMENT
Run, station ____________________________________________________
(name)

Seq.
№

Characteristics of the measuring section
Transient
Measurement Resistance of
resistance of
Piquets of beginning, Length of
date
section, Ohm
Rail string №
end of string, track № string, m
section, Ohm⋅km

The measurements are executed by:
________________________________________________
(name of organization, position, surname, n.p., signature)

APPENDIX 7.3I
(recommended)
LOG-BOOK
OF INSPECTION OF INSULATING JOINTS AND FLANGES
(underline as appropriate)

The line section _________________________________________________________
(name)

Seq.
№

Characteristics of measuring object
Place of
Object №
Type
installation

Characteristics
(measured parameter)

Date of
inspection

Inspection
results

The measurements are executed by:
________________________________________________
Page 294 of 295

(name of organization, position, surname, n.p., signature)

Key words: Underground Railroad lines, engineering-and-geological researches, capacity,
loads and effects, ventilation, heat supply, heating, water drainage, electric power supply,
communication, fire safety, technical protection, construction-and-mounting works,
commissioning

Page 295 of 295

 the underground world of traffic engineering in terms of construction history, from the point of view of the Chief Architect of Moscow, architectural history and the design bureau which lent the metro its unmistakable character.

Moscow subway, the main transport artery of the city, has a rich history. Over the years of it’s existence it has become a magnet for all kinds of urban legends and speculations. Even now, many believe in copious strange theories and myths about it’s stations. Probably the most popular legend about Moscow subway is a mysterious “Metro-2”. According to some, this is a secret subway system that was constructed at the order of Josef Stalin in the 30’s.

Supposedly, it is 50-120 meters deep, has four tube lines and has everything needed for accommodating people in the case of war. A secret passage to one of it’s stations is hidden somewhere in Kremlin building and is connected to the corridors and personnel facilities of the red Sokolnicheskaya line.

There is no confirmation or any definitive proof of it’s existence and many photos of it’s rooms that can be found on the internet are merely a hoax. Although, it is true that the Moscow subway, in fact, can be used as a shelter in the times of need. There are systems of air filtration and isolation, each station has restrooms and special sleeping zones for up to 1000 people. And it is true that there are several bunkers near the subway. The most famous one would probably be Bunker 42, near Taganskaya station. Nowadays there are many excursions that will take you on a fascinating trip inside of it.
Another story about Metro’s construction that has something to do with Stalin, tells how the circle line was created. Apparently, when Moscow underground was in it’s early construction stages, Stalin accidentally placed a coffee mug on the scheme, thus leaving a spot that looked like a ring right around the city centre. Constructionists have decided that it is indeed a new line that should be added to the project. It is of course just another rumour, but at least a fun one. Despite this, some people still search for the higher meaning in the configuration of the Circle line. Astrologists, for example, claim that the 12 stations of it correspond to 12 zodiac signs: Prospect Mira – Aquarius, Komsomolskaya – Pisces, Kurskaya – Ram, Taganskaya – Taurus, Paveletskaya – Gemini, Krasnopresnenskaya – Scoepio, Belorusskaya –  Sagittarius, Dobryunynskaya – Cancer, Oktyabrskaya – Leo, Park Kultury – Virgo, Kiyevskaya – Libra, and Novoslobodskaya – Capricorn.
So if you visit Moscow, you can go and see the station of your own zodiac sign (who knows, maybe you will feel a special spiritual connection to it?). And when you are there, pay close attention not only to the grand luxurious decoration, but also to the material of the walls itself. On this stations you can find geological treasures that can be around 350 million years old. The material of the walls contain petrified remains of ammonites, belemnites, brachiopods, nautiluses, and sea lilies. You won’t need any special equipment, some of them are pretty big and reach the size of 5-10 centimetres.

There are also several dark urban legends about ghost trains that ride the lines of the Moscow subway. One of them tells a story of a train that appears once a month at night, in the last minutes before Metro’s closing hour. It looks like an old train of 40-50’s and is operated by a man in soviet uniform. The train stops at every station and occasionally opens it’s doors. If a living person accidentally walks inside he will never be seen again. Another tale also gives an account of a strange train that can be spotted once a month. It goes around on a Circle line after midnight and stops at the stations. But this particular one does never open the doors for strangers. It is believed to transport the souls of those, who have died during the construction of the Metro.

A cheery on top of the ghost stories of the subway is a gruesome and tragic figure of The Black Driver. The legend has it, that in the 1980’s a train went up in flames on the orange Kaluzhsko–Rizhskaya line. Without wasting any time, the driver of the train threw himself in the fire to save as many passengers as he could. Eventually, the man managed to get everyone out of the burning car but died later on in a hospital because of severe thermal injuries. The superiors blamed the incident on him and his supposed lack of professional qualifications. Up to this day, the enraged ghost appeared in the tunnels in search of revenge.
None truly knows what legends are true and what are not, but it is certain that Moscow Metro will always have a complicated image in people’s minds. With it’s gorgeous interiors and all the conspiracy theories and myths attached to it’s history, it will always be one of the most important landmarks of Russia’s capital.


Metro construction in Moscow was originally planned at the end of 19th century. However, its realization was postponed due to the outbreak of World War I, the downfall of the Romanov Dynasty, the start of the October Revolution, and then, the Civil War. Finally in 1933, the blueprints for an 80 km underground railway (with 10 metro lines including 1 loop line) were completed by the Moscow Board of Urban Railways (МГЖД), and it was approved by the Central Committee⑴. After two years, the first railway lines opened. From the viewpoint of architectural style, the first 13 Metro stations for these lines were relatively diverse, ranging from classism [Fig. 1] to modernism (rationalism) [Fig. 2], due to a lack of design standards. In this first construction stage, on the whole, more attention was paid to the expression of the station’s structure than decoration

We then see a gradual shift to a more decorative and monumental style full of ideological content, i.e., Socialist Realism began in the subsequent construction stages. To be more precise, the newly designed stations in the second and third construction stages formed the norms of Socialist Realism architecture with the construction of, literally, palace-like stations. However, from where did the idea of constructing such grand stations originate?

A contemporary Russian philosopher, Mikhail Ryklin, devised the term “Metro discourse,” which includes remarks that encouraged and even forced Soviet architects to design these palace-like stations.

Metro stations in capitalist cities are gloomy, monotonous, and dull. Tired people leave the workplace and go down into the darkness of the tomb, sit in an underground train, not feeling rest, but, on the contrary, getting more tired. We have a different society and a different system. Our society is, above all, a socialist society. The socialist state can afford to build facilities which are more expensive but can provide more convenience, better health, and artistic pleasure to the public. We want such constructions, which serve millions more people than any other palace or theater, to raise people’s spirits, make their lives easier, and give them leisure and pleasure.

That is why, comrades, we have built Metro stations, where, going down, according to Moscow workers, people feel as if they were in a palace. And our Metro palaces are not monotonous. Every station has its own distinctiveness. Bourgeoisie! Where are the barracks? Where is the destruction of the individual? Where is the destruction of creativity? Where is the destruction of art? On the contrary, in our Metro stations we see the greatest development of creativity and flourishing architectural thought. Each station is a palace and each palace has its own design. But each of these palaces is lit by the common light, that is, the light of socialism advancing toward victory.

Moscow subway was formerly named in honor of Lazar Kaganovich, and then received the name of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, in addition to the military, defense and related national security secrets and secrets that need to be discussed separately, since the design it is associated with a number of mystical secrets …

Metro-2 (Russian: Метро-2) is the informal name for a purported secret underground metro system which parallels the public Moscow Metro (known as Metro-1 when in comparison with Metro-2). The system was supposedly built, or at least started, during the time of Joseph Stalin and was codenamed D-6 (Д-6) by the KGB. It is supposedly still operated by the Main Directorate of Special Programmes (ru) and Ministry of Defence.[2][3][4]
The length of Metro-2 is rumored to exceed that of the public Metro. It is said to have four lines, and to lay 50–200 meters (165-660 ft) deep. It is said to connect the Kremlin with the Federal Security Service (FSB) headquarters, the government airport at Vnukovo-2, and an underground town at Ramenki, in addition to other locations of national importance.
In 1994, the leader of an urban exploration group, the Diggers of the Underground Planet, claimed to have found an entrance to this underground system.

In the summer of 1992, the literary and journalistic magazine Yunost ('Юность') published a novel by the author and screenwriter Vladimir Gonik entitled Preispodniaia ('Преисподняя') (English: Abyss), set in an underground bunker in Moscow. Earlier, in the spring of that year, excerpts from the novel had been published in the weekly newspaper Sovershenno sekretno (ru). In an interview with both the newspaper's editor and Gonik in 1993, the author stated that the term "Metro-2" had been introduced to them, and that the novel had been written based on information collected over the previous 20 years by the two of them on things such as secret bunkers and the underground railways connecting them.[6] Gonik admitted that he had worked on the book between 1973 and 1986, and that some of the more sensitive information had been purposefully misrepresented.[7]
In later years, Gonik has argued that the bunkers, and therefore the so-called "Metro-2", had been for use by the leadership of the Politburo and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), along with their families, in case of war. According to him, in the early 1970s the General Secretary of the CPSU, Leonid Brezhnev, personally visited the main bunker, and, in 1974, awarded the Chairman of the KGB at the time, Yuri Andropov, the Gold Star Medal of the Hero of Socialist Labour. Apparently, each member of the Central Committee had a 180 m2 (1,900 sq ft) apartment, with a study, lounge, kitchen and bathroom. Gonik claims to have gathered this information working as a doctor in the polyclinic of the Ministry of Defence.[8]
After the publication of the novel in 1992, the subject of a second, secret, underground railway has been raised many times, especially in the Russian media. In particular, the magazine Ogoniok has referred to a "Metro-2" several times.

In 1991, the United States Department of Defense published a report entitled Military forces in transition, which devoted several pages to a secret government underground in Moscow. It also included a diagram of the system superimposed on a map of the city.

The Soviets have constructed deep-underground both in urban Moscow and outside the city. These facilities are interconnected by a network of deep interconnected subway lines that provide a quick and secure means of evacuation for the leadership. The leadership can move from their peacetime offices through concealed entryways in protective quarters beneath the city. There are important deep-underground command posts in the Moscow area, one located at the Kremlin. Soviet press has noted the presence of an enormous underground leadership bunker adjacent to Moscow State University. These facilities are intended for the national command authority in wartime. They are estimated to be between 200 m (660 ft) and 300 m (980 ft) deep, and can accommodate an estimated 10,000 people. A special subway line runs from some points in Moscow and possibly to the VIP terminal at Vnukovo Airfield(...)

In 1992, in an interview with Time, Deputy Director Broadcaster Igor Malashenko (ru) spoke about the existence of Sofrino-2, about 30 km (19 mi) to the north-east of Moscow's television broadcasting centers, built at great depths in case of nuclear war. According to Malashenko, the equipment was unusable due to age. He went on to say that the same fate befell many of the underground bomb shelters, and in particular a system of underground bunkers beneath the building of Moscow State University, which he said were flooded and had deteriorated.

In 2004, former advisor of Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev, former Russian president Boris Yeltsin and then president Vladimir Putin, Vladimir Shevchenko (ru) confirmed the existence of a secret in the Moscow Metro.

"Reports on the number of underground communications are greatly exaggerated. In the days of Stalin, who was very afraid of assassination attempts, there was in fact a single-track underground railway line running from the Kremlin to his so-called "Nearby Dacha" in Volynskoye. Today, neither the Dacha nor the subway line are in use. In addition, there were underground transport links between the General Staff and several other government facilities. In 1991 a pneumatic mail tube was constructed between the CPSU Central Committee building in Moscow's Old Square and the Kremlin."

In 2008, Shevchenko once again touched upon the Metro-2.

"Currently, the Kremlin subway cannot be called a transportation artery, and, as far as I know, for its continued operation it required major repairs: for among other things there are a lot of underground utilities which will eventually decay."

In 2008, Mikhail Poltoranin (ru), a minister under Boris Yeltsin in the early 1990s, explained[12]
"This is an extensive network of tunnels and an emergency command center in case of war, where you can command the nuclear forces of the country. It can hide a lot of people - its maintenance was necessary. I know that the "Metro-2" has branches that go to the suburbs so that the command could move away from the epicenter of a nuclear attack."


When ex-chief of the Moscow Metro Dmitry Gayev was questioned on the existence of the Metro-2, he responded:
"I would be surprised if it did not exist."
In the same year, in an interview with Izvestia, he said:[8]
"There is a lot of talk about the existence of secret transport tunnels. I will not deny anything. I would be surprised if they did not exist. You ask: Can we use them to transport passengers? It is not for me to decide, but for those organizations who own the railways. I do not exclude such a possibility."


In 2008, in an interview in Argumenty i Fakty, the head of the Moscow Metro independent trade union, Svetlana Razina, admitted:[13]
"Several years ago, among the drivers of the Izmailovo depot there was a recruiting for a service on secret routes, and although there were many willing, they were to select only one. Entering the midst of these tunnels is only for people with special clearance. Most often, these branches used very short trains, consisting of battery-electric locomotive and one passenger car."


As stated in a report of ITAR-TASS in 2007:[14]
"Line of the Metro-2 has long been in the KGB office, and subsequently came under the wing of the FSB."


Former head of Moscow's central administrative district and onetime information minister Alexander Muzykantskiy stated:[citation needed]
"Its underground transport communications connecting the Kremlin with the command posts, which are designed to ensure the stable operation of the senior military and political leadership in times of armed conflict, including a nuclear conflict. This is a gigantic system. It was built for 40 years. It cost a huge amount of money. For 91 years, the very existence of this system was the highest state secret."


Oleg Gordievsky, a former colonel of the KGB who worked for the British Secret Intelligence Service (MI6) for 11 years and defected in 1985, in an interview with Argumenty i Fakty called The supreme secret of the KGB, which has not been disclosed until now stated[15]
"You still do not know the main KGB secret yet: a huge underground city, a whole communications network of such facilities. But they will not show you; they will never, of course."


In 2006, the Museum of the Cold War (ru) was opened to the public, located in the old Tagansky Protected Command Point at a depth of 60 m (200 ft). Initially it was a defence bunker (GO-42 or RFQ "Tagan"), yet its depth is significantly higher than that purported of the Metro-2 lines, and so it could not have been part of the Metro-2 system.

In south-west Moscow, near the Ramenki District, there is a vacant lot to the south-west of the main building of Moscow State University.[16] A complex of buildings of the research base of Association "Science" (NEBO "Nauka"), built to a depth of between 180 m (590 ft) and 200 m, is the largest underground bunker in Moscow. According to the same source, it is connected with other secret underground facilities, and appears to be able to house up to 15,000 people.[17] A complex of surface buildings was built by architect Eugene Rozanov in 1975 by orders of Glavspetsstroy.

One of the first times the facility was mentioned was in Time in 1992. Its article refers to a journalist named "KGB officer", who claims he took part in the construction of a large underground facility in Ramenki. It was claimed construction began in the mid-1960s and was complete by mid-1970. The facility was named by the journalist as the "Underground City", which was supposedly intended to give refuge to 15,000 people for 30 years in the event of a nuclear attack on Moscow.

In the media, the "Underground City" is often referred to as "Ramenki-43", due to that being the address of one of the supposed entrances to the facility. Ostensibly, the address is home to Militarized Rescue Squad 21 and the 1st Paramilitary Rescue Squad.

D6 Line – The only line that was explored and even photographed by enthusiasts, this line definitely exists.Stations are named, unofficially, after their obvious properties.

Vnukovo airport line – Built for government emergency evacuation. Vnukovo airport, when originally built, was an airport used only for military purposes, although now it has civilian commercial services as well.

Ismaylovo line – Built for Strategic Rocket forces. Claimed to be at least partially destroyed in the 1970s

This section on the site metro.ru is conducted by an expert on Metro-2,Yuri Zaitsev.

The emblem of the Main Directorate for Special Programs (GUSP) of the President of the Russian Federation (formerly the 15th Directorate of the KGB):


Metro them. LM Kaganovich completed the processing of survey materials passenger flows on the subway.
The survey was conducted 3 days - 28, 29 and 30 January. They covered 80,000 people.
The most visited stations were: on weekdays, the Komsomolskaya Square station, on weekends, Okhotny Ryad.
It is established that the average length of a trip for one passenger is about 4 kilometers.
Most of the trains are filled on the stretch between the stations "Kirovskaya" and "Dzerzhinskaya". Here, 73 percent of all passengers using the metro pass.
Less loaded end legs. The least loaded area between the stations "Palace of Soviets" and "Park of Culture. Gorky. By summer, the number of passengers in this area, of course, will increase greatly.
In February, the average daily transportation of passengers increased to 261,000 from 159,000 people in January.
In this regard, the Metro Administration is now developing measures to further improve passenger services. The number of cars in trains increases, the schedule changes.



Post-Soviet cities are a perfect location for the existence of secret subterranean networks, real or imagined.

Russian rulers have a long history of asserting their power through large subterranean construction projects, sometimes with shadowy purposes. Shortly before the fall of Constantinople, the prized Byzantine library made its way over to Moscow. It was part of Sofia Paleolog’s dowry, the niece of the last ruler of Byzantium. The library contained 800 manuscripts in Greek, Hebrew, Latin and Arabic. A secret chamber was built for the library deep under the Kremlin. Its location was lost sometime in the 1500s. In the late 1500s, Ivan the Terrible constructed a torture chamber deep underground. Legend has it that he executed everyone who worked on its construction, to prevent anyone from identifying its exact location. In the 1700s, Catherine the Great channeled the Neglinaya River into an underground network of brick-lined canals, as part of Moscow’s expansion process. By the time the Bolsheviks came to power, there was already an advanced subterranean network under Moscow. Today, a cross-section of central Moscow might have as many as 15 levels, plunging as deep as 700 meters.

Communism emerged in Russia under a banner of modernity, characterized by urbanization and massive industrial projects. The first plans for a metro system in Moscow date back to the times of the Russian Empire, though construction did not commence until 1931. The Moscow metro system carried a heavy symbolic meaning – the epitome of Stalinist architecture; a grand public project in the heart of a worker’s paradise; the antithesis to public transit in capitalist London and New York that was starting to lose their initial luster.
The building material for the metro came from Moscow’s finest imperial and religious buildings that were being torn down on Stalin’s orders. The marble used for Park Kultury, Kropotninskaya and Okhotny Ryad stations came from the church of Christ the Savior. 75,000 workers completed the construction of the initial line in two years, under atrocious working conditions. The work was done mostly by hand because of a shortage of mechanized tools.
Spurred by Stalin’s paranoia of assassination, a secret metro line “Metro-2” was started sometime before the war, as new lines were added to the Moscow Metro. Metro 2 was directly linked to Stalin’s Dacha (suburban residence), the Ministry of Defense, command bunkers, and other military facilities. Theories diverge about the expansiveness of the project. There are sources that claim that construction of the project stopped after Stalin’s death. Others claim that every administration added new lines to the system, under the guise of urban renewal projects. An expansive website about the Moscow Metro (written in Russian), claims that there are four lines connecting various government buildings of the Kremlin, the FBS headquarters and the government airport at Vnokovo.


Moreover, there are rumors of an underground city capable of accommodating up to 30,000 people at Ramenki, as well as an alternate command post for the senior commanders of the Russian Armed Forces. The Ramenki underground complex, said to have been finished in the mid-1970s, was reportedly equipped to sustain the lives of thousands of people for up to 30 years. It had - or still has - food depots, generators, sleeping quarters, cinemas and even swimming pools!
Rumors of the existence of Metro-2 are extremely common in Russia. Russian citizens have propagated them as proof of the Soviet regime’s paranoia and self-indulgence. A subterranean exploration group called the Diggers has claimed to know its way around Metro-2’s tunnels. One writer has even suggested a practical application for the tunnels, as a way to relieve the Moscow metro of overcrowding. The Moscow metro is the world’s second most heavily used metro system, after Tokyo’s subway (for comparison, New York City’s MTA is number five).


All subway systems have incomplete lines and abandoned stations, like the City Hall or the South 4th Street stops of the MTA. It is possible that Metro-2 is just a collection of abandoned metro lines. However, according to the New Zealand Herald, the demolition of a Soviet-era hotel Rossiya exposed a network of tunnels that run from the Kremlin under the hotel to an unknown destination. Shalva Chigirinsky, the millionaire developer whose firm has been performing construction on the site, said mysterious agents - presumably from the Federal Security Service (FSB) - were keeping his workers away from part of the hotel site.

The most compelling evidence for the existence of Metro-2 comes from a US Department of Defense report written in 1991. Military Forces in Transition talks about an extensive underground installation network, linked by subterranean transit under Moscow and its suburbs. The report claims that this subterranean network would allow the Soviet government to function in the event of nuclear war.
On a less government conspiracy tinged note, EnglishRussia.com introduced us to Leonid Murlyanchik, a pensioner who decided to build a metro system for his town Lebedyan. He has been single-handedly building the system since 1984.


All of the materials for the metro have been purchased with Murlyanchik’s pension, which equals to about $250 a month. So far he’s got about 300 meters of tunnel built, complete with raised concrete platforms for four-person electric wagons. He has also collected old Soviet coins that he plans to use as tokens, and he is working on designs for access points into his neighbors’ houses. 

This subway system is called “Metro 2” and is located under the civil subway in the very centre of Moscow. Right now we’re going to go down for 110 meters in the area of Red Square.

￼
The secret special subway system can be built in many ways and for different purposes starting from evacuation of the Russian generalship and finishing with the systems of special communication of various bunkers belonging to all possible agencies and structures (already finished ones and those being still built).
It’s an amazing place with red light and numerous signaling sensors, guard posts 24/7 and constant patrol of duty staff.
￼
These tunnels are stretching for many kilometres under Moscow and one can walk along them for hours… These cables seem to be endless, they connect numerous basements of interesting buildings belonging to various institutions.


“Shelter”.
￼
At a distance of three – four kilometres away from each other special technical blocks for cabels maintenance are located as well as toilets, guard posts, ventilation and filtration systems for air purification. Such blocks are not too long – approximately 70-100 meters.
All the ventilation system of the subway construction are integrated into the ventilation systems of those basements of various building belolging to agencies, institutions etc.

In Moscow, under the network of busy city streets, there is a complex system of underground transport communications under the secret name D6. The secret metro line was built during the reign of Stalin. It passes at a depth of 210 meters - greater than the depth of a usual operating metro. According to some reports, the secret metro connects several important governmental and administrative institutions, including the Kremlin, the General Staff Academy, Zheltovsky's house and Vnukovo-2 airport.


For a number of assumptions, the purpose of bunkers is not limited by only transport purposes. A complex system of underground tunnels includes fully equipped apartments for living, as well as many technical rooms. According to modern researchers, Metro-2 was built as a shelter in the event of war, intended as a shelter for government officials. Another interesting feature of the secret metro is a construction of its rails, which have been drowned in concrete. This design allows one to drive through tunnels by car.

With what intensity and for what purposes a complex system of underground communications has been used for dozens of years, and whether it continues to be used today - one can only guess. To get to the territory of tunnels a few decades ago, could only people with a special pass. In recent years, many previously unknown bunkers have been found in the Moscow region, according to some researchers, they can be directly related to the complex Metro-2 system
.
In Moscow, there are many urban legends of government shelters and secret subway. RBTH presents a summary of trustworthy facts about military communications located deep under Russian capital.
Underground shelters that can withstand a nuclear hit, automobile tunnels from the Kremlin to Stalin’s suburban dacha, underground airports and tank tunnels of Moscow - isn’t it all some kind of nonsense? Yes, but only to some extent. Underground bomb shelters and transport communications for the Soviet government did—and still do exist.
The unhidden evidence
After World War II, construction of underground shelters, meant to protect civilians from after-effects of nuclear bombing, started in Moscow. But the highest government and military officials needed special protection – during wartime, only they can make decisions and apply measures to save the country.
Specially fortified shelters were built under strict secrecy in different parts of the city. To escape the city in case of bombing, the people in charge also needed means of secure transportation. Regular subway was unfit for that because of low level of protection, so “second subway” was constructed – it connects major government shelters and underground command centers, and also has a long radius leading outside the city borders, to vast suburban shelters. This system was labeled “Metro-2” by Muscovites.

The way we were: Communism revisited
We’re not disclosing state secrets here, as all the evidence that proves the existence of these systems is quite public. First, there are caps of mining shafts and ventilation kiosks, located in different parts of the city. Moscow subway lines were constructed using the “deep bore” method, when a shaft about 20 feet in diameter and 200 feet to 230 feet deep is dug to reach the level where actual line construction starts. Later, the shaft is used both to transport mining machines down to the mining level, and to remove the earth.
After the construction is completed, the shaft closes, and when it’s open, it means that works are under way. In the ‘70s, one such shafts was located near Red Square, inside the building of Gostinyi dvor, and could be seen on panoramic photos of Kremlin. Today, another shaft can be seen near Kitay-gorod subway station, although it’s clear that civil subway construction here had stopped decades ago. There are also a few active shafts in suburbs and outside city borders, where subways doesn’t exist. The shabby, almost abandoned looks of shafts and ventilation kiosks contribute to their secrecy; meanwhile, they are duly guarded and impossible to infiltrate.
Evidence can also be seen inside the Moscow subway. There are blocked stairways and gates leading to “nowhere” in some of the stations, and the famous dead-end line, that can be seen to the left of the train going from Sportivnaya station to Universitet stations. The line, as amateur explorers report, ends near a massive gate, which is believed to be one of the entrances to Metro-2. An inside source told RBTH that each of the officers with access to Metro-2 is allowed only into one part of the system. None of them know how many clearance levels there are, so nobody sees the whole picture and possesses the whole plan, making the declassification of the whole installation virtually impossible.
Stalin bunkers: real and fake
In Moscow, there are two Stalin bunkers, which you can easily get into with a guided tour. The first of them is located near Izmailovskaya hotel and is said to have been built in the ‘30s. In reality this place is a former storage area, which was decorated in the ‘90s to serve as a tourist attraction. The second bunker is located near Taganskaya subway station, and this one is real; however, it has no connection to Stalin at all since its construction was finished after Stalin’s death.

This object was built as a shelter for the Headquarters of Long-Distance Air Forces. It is located 200 feet below and occupies an area of 75,000 square feet. In the ‘60s, the bunker was equipped with life-support systems, supplies of water and food enough to support the officers for a long time, but in the ‘80s its condition deteriorated, and in 1995 it was declassified. By that time, steel coating on the walls and hermetic doors were the only original objects left in the whole bunker.
Nevertheless, the object is very interesting. Its main entrance shaft, that has an elevator leading down to the bunker grounds, is protected with a 20-feet thick concrete cap, hidden inside a fake 19th century house with blank windows. This cap protects the shaft from a nuclear explosion wave and can withstand a direct hit of an aerial bomb.
Now, the bunker is owned by a private enterprise that organized The Museum of The Cold War, which offers guided tours, organizes parties, banquets and presentations – for instance, the world premiere of a popular video game “Red Alert 3’ was held in the bunker.


Among the biggest tourist attractions is a staged air-raid alarm that sounds during every guided tour, and a fake nuclear missile attack on foreign countries that can be “launched” from inside the bunker by its guests. RBTH contacted Viktor B., a former guide of the bunker, who told us about the reaction of visitors to air-raid alarm staging.
“Mostly it’s fear, especially among women and children. But it passes quickly when a guide tells the group that the alarm is fake,” he said.
There were, though, some uneasy situations. According to Viktor, once, a very cheerful lady from Latin America passed out to the sound of the alarm. “The other time, a grown-up man wet his pants when he heard it,” he said.
Still, “everybody reacts to the “missile launch” trick, especially Americans! They start bombing their homeland right away, ‘Let’s do New York! We don’t care much, we’re from Florida!’,” he said.
Such jokes, of course, were unimaginable in the times of Cold War, and thank God these times are long gone, but the real strategic shelters still exist, and are rumored to still be in perfect working condition.

There’s an amazing tunnel system snaking beneath the streets of Moscow, leading to a secret cold war fortress once code named “Bunker-42.”

Designed and built after the first series of nuclear tests by the Soviet Union, these tests revealed that the optimum depth for the bunker’s silo must be no higher than 165 feet beneath ground in order to survive nuclear fallout intact. The task for the builders was enormous: construct a gigantic structure beneath the city streets without damaging Moscow’s existing infrastructure of streets and communication pathways. To do so would alert the public and innumerable unknown spies to the existence of the bunker, thereby rendering the entire (read: top-secret) thing useless. 
Strategically located inside a hill in the Tagansky district due to its proximity to the Kremlin, allowing quick access to the bunker for Stalin and the premier tier of government officials within the USSR, Bunker-42 wasn’t completed until 1956 and was thankfully never put into use in its full capacity. Rather, it spent the subsequent three decades as an airstrike command base, communicating with aircraft transporting strategic bombers carrying nuclear weapons until the political climate began to shift in 1986.
Today, the space exists as a historical monument that is equal parts museum to what life was like on the Soviet side of the Iron Curtain during the Cold War era and tour of the previously top-secret bunker itself, bringing visitors below ground to a time when the world lived on the constant brink of nuclear annihilation. A variety of tour packages are available at all hours of the day, catering to a range of ages, some of which focus more on the historical aspects of the space, while other take a nearly comic angle on the tangible threat of nuclear annihilation for all humankind. 


the metro as a construction site during the period of the “Great Terror”: it was not only the metro which was built, but Communist society was to be constructed “from the underground”. Serving the whole Soviet people and not the commercial purposes of individuals, the metro stations as “underground palaces” were to attain quasi-religious meaning in order to clear the way for the new atheist society.

The creatures of the underworld
Perhaps clergy was not so wrong. The witnesses and direct participants of all mystic accidents in the Moscow subway, metropolitan diggers, responsibly say that in the “underground” lives a myriad of creatures from the underworld. Underground extremals saw not only the spirits and ghosts but also “hohriki” with “sliders”. That’s how underground creatures are called by diggers. In addition to mystical creatures, underground is full of the devil creatures, that slightly reminiscent of representatives of terrestrial fauna. It is possible that if you step down from the platform, after a few tens of meters, you can see them in detail – a white woodlice and centipedes of especially large sizes; fleshy, that have the size of a tea saucer, spiders; rats that grew bigger eating underground food to the size of an average sheep dogs and other animals.
Lineman
Among the workers of the Moscow “underground”, there are rumors that after midnight in the tunnels often appears Lineman. And this ghost has a prototype. Literally ten years ago died a person, who really worked as an underground Lineman. The man was industrious and highly positive. It is possible that after the death the subway employee can’t calm down, and continue working, regardless of his “ghostly” condition.


Ancient burial
After such evidence, it is clear why the bulk of urban myths and legends is associated with the stations of the Moscow subway. A well-known fact is the fact that many of the stations of the Moscow “underground” are located under the cemeteries. There may be, of course, ancient tombs, but the negative energy of these places usually remains forever. For example, Sokol station. Right next to it before there was a cemetery for soldiers who died in the First World War. Staff, that serves station, as well as machinists, repeat excitedly about bloody phantoms, walking on the platform in the quiet hours of the morning. Anomalous zones are also Leninka, Arbat, Borovitskaya and Alexander Garden. This assembly is once again placed under the cemetery burials, regularly updated since the 16th century.
Ghost train
There are many urban legends associated with underground facilities, including the subway. Among the urban legends about the Moscow subway, in particular, there is a legend about the ghost train, which was repeatedly seen on the Circular line. According to one version, in this train “collected all desperate souls who couldn’t find a way into the world of the living “. Train (sometimes specified – obviously of an old design), according to one version is completely empty, on the other – filled with a haggard-looking man in gray clothes, in the cabin, you can see the driver in the form of 1940-50 years. The train stops at every station, but only occasionally opens doors. You shouldn’t come into the train, or even stand near open the door as the ones who are trying to make it disappear forever. Sometimes, stories about ghost metro train have even more terrifying details.
Black driver
Another classic scary story about the subway – the legend about the Black driver. According to legend, many years ago, the driver of the emergency staff was burned, saving passengers. Then he died in a hospital, and underground leadership accused him of what had happened. Since then, his ghost walks through the tunnels, and late in the evening it can be found at the stations.
Ghosts from Aviamotornaya


The most frightening story is related, perhaps, to the accident on the escalator at the station Aviamotornaya that occurred in 1982. Then, eight people died and another 30 were injured. The cause of the accident was misconfigured emergency brakes and structural gaps of the escalator. Despite the fact that all the dead people suffocated under the weight of people falling on their bodies (there were a hundred people on the escalator at the time of the accident), in Moscow, there were rumors that people were sucked into the moving parts of the mechanism and cut into pieces. And for nearly three decades, they talk about the bloody ghosts without hands, which sometimes appear on Aviamotornaya.
A girl in a dress
Relatively recently it was the story about a student, who was followed by drunken men at the station. According to legend, the girl tried to escape from unwanted fellow travelers, jumped on the road and disappeared into the tunnel. Since then, sometimes between stations people see a thin figure in a bright dress.


Finally, on the Internet, you can find an incredible number of perfectly serious stories about how the subway passengers faced with the inhabitants of another time: the Muscovites of the fifties of the XX century, soldiers of the Civil War and the Great Patriotic War and even horseback riders.

The Moscow Metropolitan is one of the busiest subways in the world. In 2014 it got 2.4 billion people to where they needed to go; there have been more than 145 billion rides on the capital’s metro over the last 80 years.

The Moscow Metropolitan is the world record-holder for on-time departures and arrivals. According to the Moscow transport department, its accuracy equals 99.99 percent. This is quite impressive considering that the interval between trains during rush hour is only 90 seconds. 

The Moscow subway is called the most beautiful in the world – 44 of the nearly 200 stations are listed as cultural heritage sites.


The first mentions of constructing a subway in Moscow appeared as far back as 1875. One such project was actively discussed in 1902, but at that time the municipal council decreed that the city should “refuse the solicitations” of the architects that had proposed projects. As a result, the construction of a subway was begun only in 1931 after the Soviet Union was established. The first 13 stations opened on May 15, 1935.

It is thought that the stone from the Serpukhov Kremlin, a Russian architectural monument of from the 16th-17th centuries that was dismantled in 1934, was used to decorate the first station. It is also claimed that the marble used in building the subway comes from the Moscow Cathedral of Christ the Savior, which was demolished in 1931.

During the airstrikes of World War II the Moscow subway, as well as the subways in some other cities, became bomb-proof shelters. Half a million people found shelter underground. Women and children slept in the carriages of trains that were parked overnight next to the platforms.

When German airstrikes were especially frequent, there were shops and hairdressing salons in operation at the stations. The Kurskaya metro station had a working library. On the anniversary of the October Revolution on October 6, 1941, a meeting of the Moscow Soviet was held at the Mayakovskaya station; Joseph Stalin made a speech and announced the inevitable defeat of the fascist bloc.

During the war the construction of the subway did not cease: seven new stations were built.

 For the first 20 years the subway bore the name of Lazar Kaganovich, a Soviet official responsible for the construction of the Moscow Metropolitan’s first line. In 1955 it was renamed for Vladimir Lenin.

There is a legend concerning the appearance of the circle line, which had not been planned in the original project. Legend has it that at a session devoted to its construction Stalin put his cup of coffee on the metro map leaving a brown spot around the city center. Stalin showed the circle to the builders and ordered the construction of such a line. Supposedly that is how the circle line appeared and that is why it now has a brown color on the map.

 In 2008-2009 during the repair of the Kurskaya station the original inscription over one of its portals was restored. It includes part of the Soviet anthem from 1944: “Stalin brought us up on loyalty to the people, he inspired us to labor and heroism.” The appearance of this inscription has raised protests from a number of human rights activists. Some of them have even stated that they are going to boycott the Kurskaya station.

Many stations have been renamed several times. The record-holder is the station currently known as Alexandrovsky Sad, which is located not far from the Kremlin. The station was called “Comintern,” “Imeni Kominterna,” “ulitsa Kominterna,” and from 1946-1990 was known as “Kalininskaya.” In 1990 for several days the station was named “Vozdvizhenka.”


While traveling on the radial lines of the Moscow Metropolitan to the center the stations are announced by men’s voices and while going from the center women announce them. On the circle line men’s voices announce the stations while going in the clockwise direction, with women’s voices used when going counterclockwise. This is done to simplify the orientation for blind people in the subway.

There is one fountain in the Moscow Metropolitan. It is located in the passage between the Rimskaya and Ploshchad Ilyicha stations.



Moscow’s subway features the first station in the world to be situated on a bridge and to this day the station – Vorobyovy Gory –is the only one of this type in Moscow. It was close for repairs at one time for 19 years (1983-2002).

Over the past five years underground concerts have been held every May 15 in honor of the subway’s anniversary. The wonderful acoustics of the stations made the situation too good to pass up.

In 2015 it was announced that the subway was getting ready to test an intelligence system to reduce suicides and accidents. The media often reports about people who chose the subway as a place to end their lives. The new system’s special sensors are intended for notifying train drivers in cases when a person goes on the rails.

In recent years an ambitious development program has been implemented by the Moscow Metro. By 2020 the length of the Moscow subway must grow 1.5 times in comparison with 2011, an increase of 160 kilometers of tracks. There are plans to open 60 new stations.

The Moscow Metro is not just another rapid transit system. It is the most grandiose architectural monument of the Soviet era. Grand, majestic, sublime it was built to be a visual proof of the socialist state's might. It was not just for getting from point A to point В but for adoration like the Lenin's Mausoleum or the Exhibition of People's Economy Achievements. Its social function was close to that of the famous Passages couverts de Paris of the late 19th century - it was making splendor the property of the masses. The splendor was unprecedented as it took more noble stones to decorate the first line stations than to build all of the Russian Emperors' palaces.
And the splendor was easily accessable - for five copecks fare (the price of five match boxes) anyone could enjoy marble benches, touch cool granite columns or look up at massive brass chandeliers. Expanding to the needs of the megacity the Moscow Metro preserved its status of a recognized wonder of the world. Western art critics and tour operators include it among the Ten Places That You Want To See Before You Die naming Mayakovskaya, Kievskaya and Komsomolskaya the most interesting stations.

The Moscow Metro is by no means the oldest in the world. That title belongs to the London Underground that began operations in 1863. Another famous rapid transit system - the New York City Subway - opened its first section in 1904. Meanwhile the history of the Moscow Metro is just 70 years old. The first line with 13 stations opened on May 15, 1935, between Sokolniki and Park Kultury with a branch to Arbatskaya and Smolenskaya which reached Kievskaya in April 1937. In March 1938 the Arbatskaya line was prolonged to Ploschad Revolutsii (Revolution Square) and Kurskaya. In September 1938 another line opened between Sokol and Teatralnaya running through the famous Mayakovskaya. The whole country was waiting to see the first Metro line to open, and opening of each new line became a holiday for Moscovites and guests of the Soviet capital. They would spend hours in the Metro getting out of the trains at each station to admire the Mayakovskaya mosaics by Alexander Deineka or the statues of soldiers, sailors, workers and farmers by Matvey Manizer at the Revolution Square station.
First Metro riders had to go deep down to the trains by feet as only four of the first line stations had escalators - Okhotny Ryad, Dzerzhinskaya (now Lubyanka), Kirovskaya (now Chistiye Prudy - Clean Ponds) and Krasniye Vorota (Red Gates). The rest had just staircases. But the hard way up after a ride did not spoil the impression from the stations that were planned as sort of underground "parks of cultural rest" open all year long - without breaks for severe Russian winters. Following government instructions architects built Metro stations so that they did not resemble railroad ones. That's why first designs are practically devoid of the road theme - their dominating ideas are relaxation, comfort, solemn stability.

The Metro stations looked like underground palaces or even ancient temples with their colonnades, arcades, floor lamps in the form of sacrificial cups, special effects of artificial lighting. Foreigners were astonished to see that naves and pillars in the Metro were faced with onyx, which in their countries was used to make desk-sets considered to be a sign of wealth and luxury. But to use onyx for columns! "It seems to me that people who attach such importance to luxury and light in building Metro has already built the most important things and is sure of its future", - wrote the famous French writer and pilot Antoine de Saint-Exupery who visited Moscow in 1935 as a special correspondent of the Paris-Soir newspaper.
The Metro ideological message was getting across -foreigners could see with their own eyes advantages of the socialist system.
Just think of it: to construct the first 12 kilometers of the Metro its builders had to take out 2.3 million cubic meters of unearthed ground and to pour 842.5 thousand cubic meters of concrete, and it was done in one year while it took 10 years to carry out a comparable volume of work in Berlin!

As a matter of fact Moscow as it was envisioned by comrade Stalin, "the leader of all times and peoples", is a ghost city. If you know the location and design of some Metro stations you could easily imagine the mind-boggling megapolis that Stalin wanted to see but that was not destined to be built.
The new "underground floor" of the old city was to become a foundation for a new majestic Moscow of the future. Many Metro stations were designed as elements of buildings to be erected and their structural load was taken into account. Thus Mayakovskaya station became a "basement" of Tchaikovsky Concert Hall and its architect Dmitry Chechulin had to insulate the hall against the noise of the station engine-room and passing trains. Ploschad Revolutsii entrance was to become a part of a gigantic movie theater complex to be built opposite the Bolshoy Theater. And until 1957 Kropotkinskaya, one of the first Metro stations opened on May 15,1935, was called Palace of Soviets -same as an enormous superstructure planned to be erected nearby with a 100 meter high statue of Lenin on top of it. The total height of the building was planned at 415 meters, taller than the Empire State Building, the tallest skyscraper of that time...
The mammoth buildings have never been constructed: after Stalin's death a campaign against "architectural extravagances" started in 1955 and Stalinist Empire Style gave place to pragmatic standarized architecture. Stalin's name sank into oblivion together with that style, dozens of his statues were demolished, splendid bas-reliefs and mosaics with his images were destroyed. Although they say that some portraits are just covered with thick layers of plaster easy to remove...

People get accustomed to good things quickly. And today very few Moscovites would slow down at a busy station to take a look at beautiful mosaics and high reliefs of some of the best artists of the Soviet past. What for? It's all here and won't go away. We can look at it some other day, some other time.
To attract attention beauty sometimes has to be seen in a new light, by a different angle.
"To show the Metro in a different light, to impress its beauty - that was the task we set ourselves while working on the book "Moscow Metropoliten", - says Irina Ostarkova who heads the Interros company publishing program. - Thanks to photoartists, new color correction technologies and highest quality polygraphy we succeeded in creating a unique exposition-book whose "exhibits" a reader can almost touch".
The book "Moscow Metropoliten" was created in the Interros by an outstanding team of writers, reporters, designers, photoartists, each one of them a unique personality, first among equals in their own field. And the book turned out to be on the level with the first Metro line stations created by the world reknowned architects and artists. Even color correction - an operation that today is usually done by a computer - was in case of the "Moscow Metropoliten" done by hand by professional artists.
"Unlike a soulless computer an artist is capable of illogical and therefore nonstandard extraordinary decisions, - says the project art-director Arseny Meshcheryakov. - In our project such decisions were often absolutely necessary. Our photoartists took photos of Metro stations as they are today. Many mosaics darkened by time had to be "restored" by means of color correction, and many pictures in our book look brighter, richer, more vivid than the originals. Some pictures had to be brought closer to the viewer because in real life the height of the ceilings makes it impossible to see details. Taking in advance a close look at all the Metro stations we together with the photoartists made a decision to make short and not long shots as no one yet did close-ups of the Moscow Metro. And that became the concept of our book".

The "Moscow Metropoliten" is rich not only in its outstanding collection of pictures but in its unique text material - personal impressions of contemporaries, recollections of project authors, archive extracts, complete metro glossary that gives a reader the opportunity to enrich his or her vocabulary with such words as "alfresco", "archivolt" or "cartouche"...
Each new book of the Interros is a special event for the Russian book market, a valuable contribution to the Russian publishing art.
Such is an opinion of publishing industry professionals confirmed by prizes and rewards given to Interros books. For example, the two volume "Russian Theater. Illustrated Chronicles of Russian Theatrical Life" was awarded a first class diploma in the nomination "Books on Art", and "Moscow Metropoliten" won a special diploma for the best photography at the "Art of Books. Traditions and Search 2004" competition.

Photoartists Sergei Birichev and Roman Suslov recall their work in the Metro with special feelings not because of its technical difficulties but for the unique atmosphere of one of the most mysterious places of Moscow.

The Metro is a "regime object", a high security zone with its special rules and regulations. For example it is forbidden to take photos in the Metro. But the camera men were working there for four months quite officially - after getting a special permit from the head of the Moscow Metro system Dmitry Gayev.

There were certain conditions: Birichev and Suslov were to be accompanied by a militiaman and an electrician who were provided by the Metro administration and were to help them. The camera men were not allowed into the tunnels and had to present all photos made at the Metro stations for approval.
They were working at night - from 1 am till 4 am: the Moscow Metro serves about 9 million people a day and the photographers gave up the idea of working during the daytime. Three night hours set for making photos passed by quickly, so once they did not notice that it was already time for the Metro passengers to come. The station opened its doors and was immediately full of people. At 5:30 am a crowd nearly swallowed the team with all their equipment...
But even after the working hours the Metro is working. When passengers leave, the stations are immediately filled with people in yellow work robes. It looks as if the underground people are coming back home. They start cleaning and repairing and building with knocking, gritting and rumbling noises. The Metro is in constant need of repairs. Something is leaking, some cables are on the verge of short circuit or a tile has come down from the wall. There is always something to do.

And each station is a world of its own. Each has got its own temper, its own air, even people there are different - at some stations they are all tall and stalwart, at others they are short, at some they are cheerful and open hearted, at others they are nervous and bad tempered. It must be that stations themselves influence people. Some of them depress you while others put you in good and high moods. As if it was specially planned for people to go through different moods passing from one station to another. Besides each station has its own relations with the outside world. Some stations are in discord with it, others are in harmony. Such is, for example, Ploschad Revolutsii. Despite all its pomposity and "totalitarianism" this station gives you a cozy feeling. When the camera men were working there a second exit was made ready to open, and a team of welders was making a lot of noise accompanied by shafts of sparks. But all that was no nuisance to the photoartists who passed from one statue to another in an almost poetic mood. But it was not easy to find a good model among the sculptures as many of them are in a state of decay and not because of their age but due to the fact that the Metro passengers like to touch and stroke them. Bronze sailors there have more than their fair share of bad luck: "art connoisseurs" keep on stealing their handguns.
The Metro administration has to keep several spare guns so that it can rearm the robbed sailors. But at the time the camera men took photos there they could not find a single sailor with a gun. Many other statues are in no better shape. Frontier guard shepherd dogs' noses are nearly gone as students believe that stroking those noses helps to pass exams successfully. They think it helps even more than having a five-copeck coin in one's shoe or being cursed by friends at the time of exams.


The Metro is one of most mysterious places of Moscow with lots of legends. Each station has its own mythology. The staff of Belorusskaya station may show a mosaic calf that turns its head wherever you go. It gives a tremendous impression.

And those who work at Mayakovskaya station would say that there are two Mayakovskayas, the second one exactly like the first with the same naves and Deineka's mosaics but all covered with cobwebs and closed to visitors.
You can often hear stories about "Metro Two", a parallel secret subway system linking the Kremlin with key buildings and strategic underground command posts. Purported maps of the second Metro can easily be found on the Internet. They say that dog size mutant rats live in the tunnels, that there are underground mushroom plantations and cloning laboratories. It's hard to say whether any of that is true but the photographers have seen none of these.


As far as modern mythology is concerned there are stories about the Metro extreme "sports". For example, there is allegedly a game of Who Can Stay Longer in the Metro Without Going Out. To play the game you should know very well where in the Metro it is possible to eat, to go to a rest room, to wash oneself, to sleep. But it's hard to believe in the feasibility of such a game as the Metro militia is very watchful and efficient.

When you take the Metro you don't have enough time to look around and see things. Many of them go unnoticed as you always rush somewhere, as you are always in a hurry. But if you stop and do look around you have a feeling of visiting a museum.
Close any of the central stations for transportation, start selling museum guides at the entrance and everything is ready for a tour. It's a pity that there's so much beauty that so few ever take notice of. Is it of any interest to anyone at all? Who is ever looking up to see Deineka's mosaics at Mayakovskaya? Who would slow down to enjoy Lancere's panels at Komsomolskaya? Watching crowds you will find that there are such people but there are very few of them, maybe one or two in a thousand. And those who are always pressed for time can take the "Moscow Metropoliten" book and turn over its pages at the quiet of their home admiring the ever lasting beauty of the Moscow Metro.


It is impossible to imagine Moscow without a metro system today. The Moscow Metro could almost be called an underground city with its own rules, rhythms and landmarks. It functions as a separate organism, but is, no matter what, an irreplaceable part of the city. Every decade in the history of the Moscow Metro has been different. To find out more about the history of the Moscow Metro, read this mos.ru article.
The idea to build an underground railway in Moscow was proposed half a century before the project actually began. From 1875 to 1930, at least five projects for a metro system had been developed. But construction only began in the 1930s, when it became obvious that the existing public transport (mostly trams) could not keep up with passenger traffic. After the giant traffic gridlock of 6 January 1931 which froze the movement of every vehicle, including trams and carriages, construction of the Moscow Metro finally began.


On 10 December 1931, seven construction workers came into the inner yard of 13 Rusakovskaya Street (located on the future Sokolniki-Krasnoselskaya metro section) and dug their shovels into the frozen ground. Within a month the whole first metro line from Sokolniki to the Palace of the Soviets (now Kropotkinskaya) was under construction. At first the metro was supposed to be based on shallow level stations and tunnels, but that would have meant digging up the entire city. A young engineer Veniamin Makovsky suggested a progressive solution: build the system deep underground. This fresh idea caused a lot of protests, but was approved by the Moscow Mayor Lazar Kaganovich. The dispute ended with Joseph Stalin’s approval of the deep level construction project.

The construction was slow and hard: there was neither enough experience, nor enough people, so Muscovites had to turn to their foreign colleagues for help. In 1934 one British tunneling shield was deployed for construction; a second shield based on the existing British model was built in the USSR and the pace of construction immediately begun to speed up. On 15 October 1934, the first train in the history of the Moscow Metro left the Severnoye maintenance facility for the Komsomolskaya metro station and its first trip down the new metro line.
By 15 May 1935, the first 13 stations were opened: Sokolniki, Krasnoselskaya, Komsomolskaya, Krasnye Vorota, Kirovskaya (now Chistye Prudy), Dzerzhinskaya (now Lubyanka), Okhotny Ryad, Biblioteka Imeni Lenina, Dvorets Sovetov, Park Kultury, and on the branch line, Ulitsa Kominterna (until November 1990, then Kalininskaya, now Aleksandrovsky Sad), Arbatskaya and Smolenskaya. The symbol of the Moscow Metro – the red letter M – was designed by architect Ivan Taranov.


The second stage of Moscow Metro construction was completed in 1937−1938. Kiyevskaya metro station (on the future Filyovskaya Line) and the Smolensky metro bridge – the first metro bridge in the history of the USSR – were opened. Ploshchad Revolutsii and Kurskaya metro stations on the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya Line were opened as well. Six months later six new stations on the Gorkovsky metro line (Green Line) were opened: Sokol, Aeroport, Dinamo, Belorusskaya, Mayakovskaya, and Ploshchad Sverdlova ( now Teatralnaya).
The project was carried out under the slogan, Building a Palace for the People! This is why the metro’s architecture is now described as monumental and solemn. Ploshchad Revolutsii, Mayakovskaya and Teatralnaya metro stations can easily be described as architectural masterpieces. The designs of these stations were recognised by foreign architects as well: in 1939 the design for Mayakovskaya metro station (architect – Alexei Dushkin, designer – Alexander Deineka) won a Grand Prix at the World’s Fair in New York.


During the Great Patriotic War the metro was used as a bomb shelter. During air raids, almost half a million people would go down into metro stations, hiding on the platforms as well as in the tunnels. Soon underground life became common: shops, hairdressers and even a library opened in the stations, and 217 babies were born in the metro during air raids. Departments of the General Staff were set up at Kirovskaya station (now Chistye Prudy). The tracks were blocked off, and the trains didn’t enter the station.
The metro was on the verge of destruction at one point. The order was given by Kaganovich on 15 October 1941, when the Nazis came close to Moscow. The plan was to flood part of the metro, and to plant bombs in another part. On the morning of 16 October, the metro stopped operating for the first time in history. By that evening, the destruction order was rescinded.
Despite the martial law, construction of the third line continued. During 1943−1944, Zavod imeni Stalina (Avtozavodskaya since 1956), Paveletskaya, Novokuznetskaya, Stalinskaya (Semyonovskaya since 1961), Izmailovsky Park Kultury I Otdykha (the station changed its name several times, it has been Partizanskaya since 2005), Baumanskaya and Elektrozavodskaya stations were opened. The tunnels between Ploshchad Sverdlova and Zavod imeni Stalina stations were built under the Moskva River. All the stations built during those years have commemorative plaques, “Built in the days of the Great Patriotic War.”
During the war years, over 13 km of tracks and 7 stations were built. Between 1941 and 1950, the metro grew by 19.66 km and 13 stations in total.


After the war, the construction of the fourth stage began, including the Circle Line and Arbatskaya Line (Lines 5 and 3, respectively). This stage was completed in the 1950s.
At first the Circle Line was to be built under the Garden Ring, but the designers decided to connect it to the railway squares. On 1 January 1950 the first section from Park Kultury to Kurskaya stations was put into service running just under the Garden Ring. On 30 January 1952 the second section was launched: from Kurskaya to Belorusskaya stations. The Circle Line stations were the peak of Stalin empire style. All 12 stations were designed with sculptures, murals and original lighting, every one of them unique.


Construction of the Arbatskaya Line (Line 3, the Blue Line) coincided with the beginning of the Cold War. The new line was never mentioned in newspapers until 1952, because these stations could have become bomb shelters in case of nuclear attack.
In 1955, the government decided “to eradicate luxury in designing and building.” Stations were built to standard designs, not individual designs, so VSKhV (VDNKh today), Sportivnaya and other stations look simpler compared to previous efforts. Surface stations were used (Studenckeskaya, Kutuzovskaya and Fili), because it was a less costly engineering process. The cost cutting resulted in construction errors when Leninskiye Gory station (now Vorobyovy Gory) and the Luzhentsky metro bridge were built, and endurance problems soon surfaced.
During 1951−1960, 33.5 km of tracks and 21 stations were built in total.


The simple style adopted during the 1950s survived until 1970, when “glass” stations (with glass entrance halls) and “centipedes” (stations with 40 columns in two lines) began appearing. New stations were different only in the colour of the covering stone. The first “centipede” station was Pervomayskaya. The least expensive section built during this decade was on Filyovskaya Line (Line 4) from Fili station to Molodyozhnaya station. This line (Light Blue Line) is almost entirely a surface level line.

The radial lines were also extended during the 1960s. On the eve of 1967 the Purple Line (Line 7), including Taganskaya, Proletarskaya, Volgogradsky Prospekt, Tekstilshchiki, Kuzminki, Ryazansky Prospekt, and Zhdanovskaya (now Vykhino) stations, was opened. In 1969, the Green Line (Line 2) was extended southwards: Kolomenskaya, Kashirskaya, Varshavskaya and Kakhovskaya stations were opened.
One station was closed forever during this decade. At first, Pervomayskaya station was opened in 1954 at today’s Izmailovo facility, but when the Arbatskaya Line (Line 3) was extended it became redundant. The station was converted into a maintenance shop, and the entrance hall was changed into a hall for the maintenance facility employees.
A similar story happened at Kaluzhskaya temporary station in the next decade. The station existed at the Kaluzhskoye maintenance facility between 1964 and 1974. That means that the Moscow Metro has sections that are not used by passengers: about 4 km of metro lines and two stations.
During 1961−1970, 58 km of tracks and 31 stations were built in total.


From 1971 to 1980, the metro not only kept extending towards the outskirts, but also connected radial lines and filled gaps inside the Circle Line. In early 1972, the Ploshchad Nogina (now Kitai-Gorod) and Kolkhoznaya (now Sukharevskaya) stations opened.
An esthetic design concept was developed. The interiors combined the individuality of Stalin’s metro and the industrial look of Khrushchev’s metro. Deep level stations were built in the city centre. Kuznetsky Most, Pushkinskaya, Gorkovskaya (now Tverskaya) stations were built in a 1930’s style. Standard design stations were modernised with a more individual approach. Svibolovo station was decorated with smalt panels and miniatures; Marksistskaya station features Florentine mosaics, while Shabolovskaya station has a stained glass panel.


In the 1970s, 52.8 kilometres of lines and 30 stations were built.

The end of the 1970s and the early 1980s were the most productive in terms of metro construction. In 1983, the Serpukhovskaya Line (Gray Line) opened with eight stations, from Serpukhovskaya to Yuzhnaya.
In 1985, the Moscow Metro received a station designed by Czechoslovakian architects. While the architects and engineers from Russia were building Prazhskaya station, Soviet designers worked on Moskevská station in Prague.



After Perestroika, the pace of the metro construction slowed. From 1985 to 1988 three stations opened each year. In 1989, only one was built – Krylatskoye on the Filyovskaya Line. Four stations opened in 1990: Yasenevo and Bitsevsky Park (now Novoyasenevskaya) on the Kaluzhsko-Rizhskaya Line, and Cherkizovskaya and Ulitsa Podbelskogo (now Bulvar Rokossovskogo) on the Kirovsko-Frunzenskaya (now Sokolnicheskaya) Line.
In the 1980s, 46.5 km of tracks and 28 stations were built in total.


In the tumultuous 1990s, metro construction slowed sharply. However, a few projects that had started before the end of the USSR were finished. In 1991–1994, the northern part of the Serpukhovsko-Timiryazevskaya Line (Gray Line) opened from Savyolovskaya to Altufyevo. In 1995−1999 the Lyublinskaya Line (Light Green Line) from Chkalovskaya to Maryino opened after a long construction period. In August 2000, Ulitsa Akademika Yangelya station opened on the Serpukhovsko-Timiryazevskaya Line.

In this difficult decade the state had little money, so the metro had to use its own funds to build new stations. Despite the harsh economic conditions, the stations looked quite good.
In the 1990s, 32.8 km of tracks and 19 stations built in total.


In the new century, the metro lines were extended not only to the suburbs, but also beyond the Moscow Ring Road. The first station built outside Moscow was Bulvar Dmitriya Donskogo, opened at the end of 2002. In the same year, after two decades of reconstruction, the Vorobyovy Gory station on the rebuilt Luzhnetsky metro bridge was opened. The deepest station, Park Pobedy, opened in May 2003; six months later, the Butovo light railway line opened for service. In 2004, the monorail was launched in the north to connect the Ostankinsky and Timiryazevsky districts. In 2009, the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya Line (Blue Line) was extended to the west. In addition to running outside the MKAD, Myakinino became the first station built in the Moscow Region. New stations also appeared on the Filyovskaya and Lyublinsko-Dmitrovskaya lines.
The architecture also changed and new styles were adopted. The most beautiful are Slavyansky Bulvar, Park Pobedy, Annino and Volokolamskaya.


In the 2000s, 37.5 km of tracks and 21 stations were built. Including the monorail, Moscow received 42 km of tracks and 27 stations.


Today, the metro is reaching the most remote districts thus making the life of Muscovites easier. In the past six years, the metro has been extended to Brateyevo, Orekhovo-Borisovo, Troparyovo, and the Novokosino and Vykhino-Zhulebino districts that are outside the MKAD. Old districts are also receiving new stations: in September 2016, in Moscow’s north and northeast, three stations were opened: Butyrskaya, Fonvizinskaya and Petrovsko-Razumovskaya. In March 2017 three stations were opened: Minskaya, Lomonosovsky Prospekt and Ramenki. Many interchanges have appeared beyond the Circle Line: Zyablikovo, Delovoi Tsentr, Park Pobedy, Bitsevsky Park, and Petrovsko-Razumovskaya. They help optimise traffic flow and allow passengers to get around Moscow without going through the centre.

A highlight of 2016 was the launch of the Moscow Central Circle, a traditional urban railway that is integrated into the metro system. Its 31 stations allow passengers to travel quickly while avoiding the city centre.
The Moscow Metro continues to be developed. In less than seven years, 55 stations and 101 kilometres of track, including the MCC, have opened: much more than in any other period. When the first five stations of the Third Interchange Circuit are open, there will be 111.5 kilometres of track and 60 stations.
Construction is almost finished at the Rechnoi Vokzal–Khovrino; Ramenki–Rasskazovka; and Petrovsko-Razumovskaya–Seligerskaya lines. In 2018, plans call for opening the new 17.5 km Kozhukovskaya Line; in 2019, the Sokolnicheskaya Line will reach Stolbovo; in 2020−2021, the entire Third Interchange Circuit will be opened for service. The length of this line will be about 65 km.
In all, from 2011 to 2020, Moscow will get some 200 km of tracks and over 100 new stations, including the MCC. It took about 45 years (from 1965 to 2010) to build the same number of stations.




This underground bunker next to Taganskaya metro station was built in the 1950s at the height of the Cold War. Its entrance is camouflaged by an ordinary 19th-century house with its walls hiding a six-meter thick cement cap. The bunker itself is located at a depth of 65 meters (or the equivalent of 17 floors below ground) at the same level as the circle metro line.
This underground complex occupies more than 7,000 square meters and is divided into four blocks of tunnels. The reserve headquarters of the General Staff of the Air Force were located here, so that work could go on even if Moscow was under nuclear attack. The temperature inside the bunker is 16° Celsius.
In 2006 the Museum of the Cold War opened in the bunker. It is an interactive museum: Visitors can try on Soviet-era military uniforms, handle the weapons, explore formerly secret tunnels wearing helmets and protection suits, try out the responsibilities of a radiotelegraphist and even “launch” nuclear warheads by pressing the infamous red button.


Stalin’s Bunker is located near the Izmailovskaya metro station. Its construction dates back to the 1930s and was planned as the reserve headquarters of the Supreme Commander of the Soviet Union. It was connected to the Kremlin by a 17-kilometer underground tunnel.
Stalin worked here in late November and early December 1941 at the beginning of World War II. It was in this bunker that the decision was made not to abandon Moscow and to defend it at all costs. 
In 1996 the bunker was turned into a museum and opened to visitors. The bunker itself is relatively small with only the most essential spaces: a conference room, an office, a room for rest, the generals’ office, supply rooms and a refectory.


The Neglinnaya River is a left tributary of the Moscow River that proceeds for 7.5 kilometers. It is as ancient as the capital itself with the first references to this river in old chronicles coinciding with the first mentions of Moscow.
The river’s origin is in the area near Marina Roshcha. From there it passes under the city center and Aleksandrovsky Garden before flowing into the Moscow River through a big stone opening in the embankment that can be seen from the Bolshoy Kamenny Bridge. The Neglinnaya River flows through a pipe for most of its length. A private company organizes an excursion along one part of the stone tunnel. However, even a planned excursion can be abruptly cancelled because of rain as the water in the river frequently floods.
The Neglinnaya River is considered one of the most mystical places in Moscow: frequent visitors often see ghosts in the tunnel. To enter the stone tunnel you have to go through a sewer located in the area of the Stretensky Boulevard metro station.

These stone mines provided the limestone needed to build the fortresses and churches of the white-stone buildings of Moscow. They began to be exploited in the 17th century. During the Soviet period stone was excavated here to reinforce airplane runways and during World War II a military hospital and later on a seismic station were located here.
In 1974 the entrance to the Syani mines was filled in. By that time its system of underground tunnels exceeded 90 kilometers. On June 3, 1988 underground enthusiasts unsealed one of the entrances and in 2007 it was substantially restored by local inhabitants and regular visitors to the mines.
Regular visitors call themselves “sistemshchiki,” which is slang related to the Soviet hippie movement. A particular subculture has developed around these caves with its traditions, rules, myths and rituals.
The height of the tunnels of the Syani mines network ranges between 0.4 and 3.5 meters and their depth reaches up to 30 meters. The temperature inside the caves is usually in the range of 7-10° Celsius. To reach the entrance to the caves, take bus number 439 from Domodedovskaya metro station and get off at the stop “Pochta.” The journey takes about 35 minutes.


We’re in a dark tunnel somewhere deep under the Metropol Hotel when our guide Ivan calls us to a halt. The beams of our head torches pick out the underground river we have been following for the last two hours as it cascades down a slope and vanishes into darkness. Shuffling along a narrow walkway beside the torrent, we peer into a large shaft blocked by a huge reinforced grille.
“This section of the tunnel leads under Red Square toward the Kremlin,” says Ivan. “The grating was put up two years ago. And that white thing on the wall inside is a motion sensor. If anybody tries to get past, security forces will be down here in an instant.”
He points out a spot on the opposite wall where a security camera was mounted to keep an eye on the entrance to the tunnel. “It didn’t last long,” he says. “It was only up for about four hours before one of us took it away as a souvenir.”
It’s a hot summer afternoon in Moscow, but the bright light and warmth of the street above seem light years away from where we are. Down in the tunnels beneath the city the temperature is a chilly 8-10 degrees Celsius and your breath hangs in the air.
Ivan is a member of an informal community known as “Diggers,” underground enthusiasts whose hobby is exploring and documenting the vast network of tunnels that lie under Moscow. These range from drainage systems and subterranean rivers to secret Soviet bunker complexes and “Metro-2,” a secret underground rail system of four lines, allegedly built by Josef Stalin in order to link the Kremlin with various sites of strategic importance.
However, while knowledge and surefootedness are essential to navigate this dark world beneath the city, access is relatively unrestricted. The company Extremalnaya Moskva (Extreme Moscow) organizes weekly guided tours along the Neglinnaya River, giving locals and tourists with troglodytic tendencies and a sense of adventure the opportunity to see Moscow from a completely new angle.


The Neglinnaya flows from near the Savyolovsky Railway Station in the north of the city under the city center and into the Moskva River. Covered in the early 19th century, this tributary now passes invisibly down Neglinnaya Ulitsa, past the Bolshoi Theater and under Red Square and Alexandrovsky Sad before emptying into the Moskva.
Our tour starts at the Tsvetnoi Bulvar metro station, where we meet up with Ivan, a young Muscovite in a baseball cap and System of a Down T-shirt. After a quick briefing, he leads us off in what appears to be the wrong direction. Wondering where we will descend into the tunnels, we cross the Garden Ring and enter a large park.
Our gateway to the underworld turns out to be an innocuous drain cover beside a flowerbed in front of a statue. Ivan hands out rubber waders, torches and gloves, and explains that we are about to descend into an old part of the city’s drainage system. “Watch out for falling debris and step aside as soon as you reach the bottom,” he warns.
Five minutes later we are standing almost waist-deep in fast-flowing water in a narrow, arched brick tunnel. Since this is not a sewer, there is no smell as such, beyond the slight odor of damp walls, stone and dirty rainwater. The murmur of traffic is faintly audible.
The six of us move along the dark passage in single file, the sound of rushing water a constant accompaniment. Every now and again a loud metallic percussion reverberates around the dank space – this means a car on the road above has just driven over a manhole cover.
At one point Ivan reaches out and picks something off the wall. He shines his torch down on his hand, where a large coppery cockroach is sitting on his finger.
“There are four types of animals to be found in the Neglinnaya,” he says, “Rats, cockroaches, fish and spiders.” Former Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov, explains Ivan, claimed to have discovered giant white cockroaches in the Neglinnaya tunnel during reconstruction work at the Bolshoi Theater in 2010. Luzhkov described “large cockroaches” of up to 10 centimeters in length that “we couldn’t even imagine.” He insisted that the insects were white “because it’s dark there, and they don’t want humans to touch them.” Ivan, however, says there is no evidence to suggest these creatures exist.



The tour takes in several sections of tunnel, including the original “collector,” or drain, and the “new” section – a high, 4-kilometer-long concrete tunnel built from 1974-1989 to expand the capacity of the drainage system and minimize flooding.   
At various points in the past the river has been redirected into different pipes and channels, resulting in a network of bricked-up tunnels, junctions, archways and sluices. Side pipes carry rainwater into the main channel – at one stage a torrent of water suddenly erupts from a pipe behind us, spouting tens of gallons into the river.
A keen sense of balance is essential: At times the footing is uneven, and at one stage we are required to abseil down a 45-degree chute amid rushing water.
Diggers may be serious about their obsession but they appear to possess a sense of surreal humor, as evidenced by the graffiti on the tunnel walls: In one place the giant words “War and Peace” stretch from floor to ceiling in English.
At the end of the tour, we ascend a corroded ladder up a dusty brick shaft – and when the coast is clear we emerge from a manhole right in the middle of busy Trubnaya Ploshchad. The brilliant sunlight and pedestrians passing in blithe ignorance of the secret world beneath them strike a startling contrast, as two of our companions note.
“From now on, every time I drive over a drain cover I’m going to be thinking: ‘There are people down there,’” says Alexander, whose girlfriend Alexandra has taken him on the tour as an unusual birthday present. “Few people on the surface think about what’s going on under their feet.”

Mikhailov, together with others, runs a service called DiggerSpas (=Digger-Saviours, Digger-Aid-Troop) which cooperates with various authorities in the case of catastrophies where the knowledge of subterranean Moscow may be useful. He is well-known to the secret service, but seems to enjoy a certain estimation from all sides as an underground expert.

Paveletskaya Station (Ring Line)
	Paveletskaya station/Ring Line was opened in 1950.
 
Main hall.
I wasn’t able to find much information on this station.	
	I liked the marble patterns very much. I think it is one of the nicest stations of the Moscow Underground.
Starting already in the 80-ies there was a group of young Muscovites who undertook explorations of the underground system on their own account, just because of curiosity, and longing for adventures. They found many interconnections between underground tunnels and storage places of various public and private institutions.
They state that there are 6 levels below Moscow, at some places even up to 12.
Dobryninskaya Station
	This station was opened the same day as Paveletskaya, the 1st of January, 1950.
In 1961 it was named after Pyotr Dobrynin, a Muscovite bolshevik who fought and died in the October Revolution. Before that it was called Serpukhovskaya, after a road leading to Serpukhov, a town south of Moscow.
		
Entrance hall and pillar.
Take a look at the lamp: it has a red star inside		Detail from the Main Hall (above)
This mosaic bears the name: "The morning of the Cosmic Era" and pictures a mother and her baby playing with a rocket.		That’s how one imagines the Cosmic Era, isn’t it?!
This vast underground system is connected with houses’ basements, with service tunnels for the Underground, with bomb shelters and storage places of the military and the civil defence authorities.
The above mentioned group who call themselves "diggers" (even in Russian: diggeri) have been exploring the Moscow Underground for about two decades. Last year they wanted to open a museum with some of the strange stuff they found on their underground research trips.
According to them Moscow has a vast subterranean population: Refugees from former Soviet Republics and released prisoners who could not obtain the permit to live in Moscow that was required until some years ago; evicted families, gypsies and all classes of homeless; alcoholics and drug-addicts ...
Oktyabrskaya (=October’s) station
	Main hall. This station was also opened on 1-1-1950.
 
I have this picture hanging on my wall and whenever people ask me what this building is I answer: guess! and they say: A church!
There was a certain confusion about this station’s name that it only acquired in 1961. Before that it was called Kaluzhskaya.
The decoration of this station has a lot of motives from the Great Patriotic War.
 
The lamps are deliberately trying to resemble torches.	
The Diggers have repeatedly found corpses on their tours, sometimes of drug-addicts or alcoholics who died from an overdose, but more frequently of people who had been murdered, their remains being hidden somewhere in the vast underground system – sometimes entirely, sometimes only in parts ...
As a lot of the maintenance system of the underground and the city as a whole broke down in the 90-ies – for lack of funding, and in the wake of the general negligence and corruption that prevails in Russia ever since the end of Soviet Union – the Diggers started to fulfil tasks which, though utterly necessary, are not being taken care of by the official authorities. They report corpses or suspicious persons to the police, which to a certain extent is cooperating with them.
This station was also opened 1-1-1950.
Detail from the main hall and the platform.
The reliefs inside the medallions are dedicated to the recreation of the working people.
The ceiling pattern which to me is creating the impression of a very imaginative mixture between honeycombs and a spider’s web.

Already in the mid 90-ies the Diggers warned that there might be terrorist or sabotage actions from below and inside the Underground as the city of Moscow is extremely vulnerable from below, for lack of supervision. They even reported suspicious groups of people in military clothing (which is quite frequent in use also by civilians, as being cheap and durable,) evidently exploring and/or preparing underground tunnels – for what?
Their alert was in vain, as the Underground bombings of the last years have shown.

Kievskaya Station is a very complicated issue as there are three stations with this name: On the Ring Line, the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya and the Filichevskaya Lines. The first and the second were opened with only a few year’s difference and can easily be confused.
The 3 stations are interconnected with passages, and I have no idea from where this detail is.
 
 
I decide to introduce all of them as it would be an omission to show only one.


Detail is from Kijevskaya Station /Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya Line.
This station was opened in 1953.
The younger two Kievskaya Stations are quite similiar in design, even in the colours, as both of them are focussing on Ukrainian art.
Platform of Kievskaya St./A-P. Line


Main hall of Kievskaya St./Arb-P. Line
The lamps in the main hall, giving an exciting illumination to the ceiling, making it look like the surface of a stormy sea ...


A detail from this station that I decided to display not so much for its beauty or motive, but to show that even gold was used in the decoration of this Underground station.
Can you imagine any other underground system in the world that would use gold leaf in an underground station?
And this station is full of pictures like that ...
This – just as the marble, the granite or the mosaic material, – is a display of the Russian inclination towards splendour and luxury. You may even call it extravagance, if you like, without missing the point.
Sure the Moscow underground is an offspring of the Soviet system and was a means of propaganda.
But still, the lavishness with which money was spent on it has deeper roots. Even in Tsarist Russia this was the philosophy of the rulers, clergymen and civil authorities: People all over the country may live in shacks and holes, diseases may spread and hunger may strike vast regions of the interior. But to the visitors and the public, or at least to the inhabitants of the capital, we show all the wealth and skills that our country has to offer: Generous palaces full of marble, gold on Petersburgh bridges and on churches’ domes, expensive fur coats even when it’s warm enough to do without them ...
As far as one can trust the news, the New Russians, the oligarchs and the smaller sized bloodsuckers, follow the same philosophy.
The entrance hall of the Kievskaya Station/A-Pok. Line


Kievskaya Station/Ring Line
It was opened in 1954. It is the youngest of the three Kievskaya Stations.
 
 
Main hall
 
Arches in the main hall, leading to the platforms.


Entrance to and exit from the main hall
Finally for the sake of completeness, below: the main hall of Kievskaya Station/Filichevskaya Line, opened in 1937. The materials and the design are exquisite as well, but to me somehow it lacks the cosiness of the others ... Perhaps of the columns instead of walls with doorways, perhaps because of the lack of pictures ...

Kievskaya Station is a very complicated issue as there are three stations with this name: On the Ring Line, the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya and the Filichevskaya Lines. The first and the second were opened with only a few year’s difference and can easily be confused.
The 3 stations are interconnected with passages, and I have no idea from where this detail is.
 
 
I decide to introduce all of them as it would be an omission to show only one.

Detail is from Kijevskaya Station /Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya Line.
This station was opened in 1953.
The younger two Kievskaya Stations are quite similiar in design, even in the colours, as both of them are focussing on Ukrainian art.

The lamps in the main hall, giving an exciting illumination to the ceiling, making it look like the surface of a stormy sea ...


Kievskaya Station/Ring Line
It was opened in 1954. It is the youngest of the three Kievskaya Stations.

A detail from this station that I decided to display not so much for its beauty or motive, but to show that even gold was used in the decoration of this Underground station.
Can you imagine any other underground system in the world that would use gold leaf in an underground station?
And this station is full of pictures like that ...
This – just as the marble, the granite or the mosaic material, – is a display of the Russian inclination towards splendour and luxury. You may even call it extravagance, if you like, without missing the point.

Arches in the main hall, leading to the platforms.
Entrance to and exit from the main hall
The columns’ system is a feature of the first stage of underground construction in Moscow. Perhaps it was cheaper.

The system must have some disadvantages apart from the esthetic point of view, as it wasn’t employed frequently in the later underground stations. It seems to me that it can only be employed to a certain depth.

The Digger’s most prominent figure, Vadim Mikhailov, seems to be a well-known Moscow original. In 2002 he acquired even more fame as he took part in the storming of the musical theater in Moscow where Chechen fighters held hostage hundreds of people.
(As we know, the whole action didn’t produce very convincing results. A lot of people perished due to the application of a special poisonous gas-like substance that caused the deaths of the hostage takers, but of many hostages as well. One of the reasons for that was that this gas was so secret that its chemical formula was never revealed to the doctors treating the surviving hostages. But this, it must be said, cannot be blamed on the Diggers.)
Mikhailov also acted as an advisor to the police and special forces about possible connections of the building to the underground system, thus cutting off a possible escape route for the hostage takers.
This station, opened in 1954, is named after a Moscow district called Krasnaya Presnya. The district itself was named after a brook called Presnya flowing there originally.
The name "Krasnaya" (=red) was given to it only after the October Revolution to commemorate the "heroes of 1905" as this district of Moscow played an important role in the first Russian Revolution of 1905. (This was the revolution about which the famous film "Cruiser Patyomkin" from Sergei Eisenstein is giving an insight.) Heavy fighting took place there, later repression raged among its inhabitants.

There is a museum in this district, commemorating those days of turmoil. At least, it was there in 2000 when I last visited Moscow. I seemed to be the only visitor for ages. The wardens were elderly women, quite ill-humoured (I assume, being paid minimum pensions, perhaps even with delay, and trying to earn extra money this way) and extremely unhelpful and unfriendly. Evidently the were not used any more to visitors passing by.
The station’s marble reliefs are also dedicated to the events of 1905.


The name "Krasnaya" (=red) was given to it only after the October Revolution to commemorate the "heroes of 1905" as this district of Moscow played an important role in the first Russian Revolution of 1905. (This was the revolution about which the famous film "Cruiser Patyomkin" from Sergei Eisenstein is giving an insight.) Heavy fighting took place there, later repression raged among its inhabitants.

A “narrow-gauge railway” – this we take to mean an underground railway similar to that used in the mining industry – was built in 1947 to connect the Kremlin to one of Stalin’s dachas, at Matveyevskoye, southwest of central Moscow. Large-scale tunneling for Metro-2 began during the early 1950s, and this railway was reconstructed to form the first line of Metro Dva (the inner portion of “Leonid”). 

An old story (or fable) holds that because Stalin could make scattered appearances around Moscow in quick succession, he had a Secret Subway reaching all corners of Moscow for his own use. The story had a basis in fact . . . perhaps. 

The depth of the network is described as “strongly variable,” from 50-200 meters (150-600 ft) below ground. Recent Metro Dva tunnels are said to be 100-200 meters (300-600 ft) deep. The inside diameter of the tunnels constructed from the early 1980s is 5.45 meters (17 ft 8 in), “practically the same” as the “public metro.” However, most recent Metro Dva tunnels have a concrete lining, 1 meter (3 ft 3 in) thick, between outer and inner metallic linings. 

If “Iosif,” Leonid,” “Yuri” and “Boris” all exist as described, the minimum total route length is about 150 km. Based on the stated tunnel size, and allowing for the thickness of linings, the minimum quantity of excavated spoil is about 23 million cubic meters (nearly 800 million cubic feet) – not including stations and ventilation shafts. That, as they say, is a lot of dirt. 

Ventilation shafts are described as “usually not disguised,” although they are “much more rare” than along the lines of the “usual metro.” The “ventshakhty” (“vent shafts”) often contain evacuation elevators. 

--Metro Dva tunnels have no “contact rail” (third rail) – in other words, the lines are not electrified. However, tracks are embedded in concrete, just as are tramway (streetcar) tracks, because microbuses operate through the tunnels in addition to trains. Metal borders (barriers) line the lower portion of the tunnel walls. Diesel railcars, capable of 60 km/h (40 mph) carry passengers, and (small) gasoline locomotives, capable of 15 km/h (9mph) pull goods (freight) trains. There are also motorized velocipedes (“handcars”). The latest Metro Dva diesel railcars are articulated. 

Microbuses, diesel railcars, gasoline locomotives and motorized velocipedes? Working on a single-line (single-track) tunnel system far underground, with “rare” ventilation shafts? 

Um, we don’t think so. Soviet diesel fuel was notorious for low quality, and Soviet diesel engines were, at one time, notorious for smoke emission. Use of gasoline traction is avoided underground owing to fumes and the risk of fire and explosion. Battery-electric locomotives have considerable range, but use of such traction on lines having the reported length of “Yuri” stretches the imagination. 

On the other hand . . . Soviet lack of attention to industrial safety bordered on callousness, and this was also true of “military” and “security” facilities. 

Y’know, Metro-2 makes a fascinating yarn, but we’re not sure we’d want to ride. Based on the reported scarcity of ventilation shafts, the air down there must be dank and stagnant. Reports that government officials do not use Metro-2 in peacetime tend to reinforce the impression that travel by Metro-2 is not very pleasant. (This would be true in particular given small-profile tunnels equipped with a narrow-gauge mining railway. No surprise to anyone who has ever worked in an underground mine.) 

If this is first detailed description online of “Metro 2” in English – and that appears possible – then let it be a tribute to the efforts of the people who have tracked all this down, wrote it up and posted it. All we did was translate (. . . and add the opinionated commentary that you expect from this blog!).

METRO-2, LINE 1 – “Leonid.”

Opened 1967, although a portion was “supposedly” opened earlier.

Length: 27 km [17 mi].

Station locations:

-----“Kreml” [the Kremlin] http://www.kremlin.ru/eng .

-----“Biblioteka im. Lenina” [Lenin Library; official name is now Russian State Library http://www.rsl.ru/defengl.asp ; http://www.urbanrail.net/eu/mos/pix/L1-biblio-im-lenina.jpg ]. For the evacuation to the “underground city” [aka “Deep-Underground Command Post” in USDOD-speak) at Ramenki of all readers in the building at the moment of the alert signal “ATOM.” The “Kremlin” and “Library” stations may be one and the same.

[Um, yeah: the library is about 300m (0.2 mi) from the Kremlin’s western wall, but the major government buildings are twice as distant.]

-----The “yellow house with turret” on Smolenskaya Ploshchad [Smolensk Square]; the project of “Academician Zholtovskiy.” A reference to the metro station entrance at Smolenskaya Ploshshad (http://beeflowers.com/Metro/Smolenskaya/imagepages/image7.htm , http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-3-11 ). The article comments as follows: This special structure contains entrances to the two metro systems: the (public) Filyovskaya Line (Line 4 http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-4-11 ) and Metro-2 (Smolenskaya is also served by the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya Line (3): http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/f32.html ). The elevators in this building to the Metro-2 station stirred legends of such stations beneath almost every Metro station entrance in Moscow.

[We note that a large office building on Smolenskaya Ploshchad housed the USSR Ministry of Foreign Affairs, now that of the Russian Federation http://www.ln.mid.ru/bul_ns_en.nsf/kartaflat/en01 .]

-----Former residence of the first and last President of the USSR, on the Lenin Hills.

[Reference is to “Gorbachev’s Moscow Residence” on the USDOD map; “Leninskiye Gori,” the Lenin Hills, are known once again by the historic name “Vorob’yovy Gory,” Sparrow Hills http://cr.middlebury.edu/public/russian/Bulgakov/public_html/vorobevy.html .]

----Underground city [aka “Deep-Underground Command Post”] at Ramenky, able to accommodate 12,000 – 15,000 inhabitants. Pedestrian tunnel to the main building of the “MGU” [aka Moscow State University]. MSU entrance at KPP, Zone B.

[“KPP” is an acronym for “Kontrolno-propusknoi punkt,” Identity Check Point or Passport Control Pointhttp://www.keele.ac.uk/depts/hi/resources/modern%20resources/PoliceGlossary-v3.pdf .] 

[The pedestrian tunnel is one of those Metro Dva details that tends to stir raucous debate among Your Favorite Transit Pundits. If it exists . . . then it would have to be no shorter than about 2 km, almost 1 1/4 miles. That’s quite a hike to board an evacuation train – that passed the university at roughly half that distance.

[“But Comrades! Do you not agree that pedestrian tunnel between University and Command Post might be useful during peacetime?”

[. . . That sounded like a winner to the rest of us . . .] 

-----Institute of Cryptography, Analysis and Information Science, FSB Academy, FSB, Russian Federation http://www.globalsecurity.org/intell/world/russia/fapsi-org.htm .

[FSB, “Federalnaya Sluzhba Bezopasnosti,” is the Federal Security Service http://www.fsb.ru . Yes, yes, yes, a thousand times yes, that really is a link to their official website! FSB has inherited the internal-security functions of the former KGB – which, as astute websurfers know, is the Russian acronym for “Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezopastnosti,” Committee on (or: “for”) State Security http://www.ulfsbo.nu/kgb/kgb_2.html ; note that the law establishing and governing the KGB is described as an “unpublished statute.”]

The article describes this as an “Enormous brick building with an entrance into the Olympic village.” 

[The latter was built for the 1980 Summer Olympic Games – boycotted by the U.S., about 50 other countries, and many individual athletes from countries that did participate http://www.olympic.org/uk/games/past/index_uk.asp?OLGT=1&OLGY=1980 . The boycott, a response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1989, was announced by U.S. President Jimmy Carter. The USSR and its satellites – minus Romania – boycotted the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics in retaliation. Moscow is currently campaigning to host the 2012 Summer Olympics http://www.m2012.ru/en/?did=2_11_41 .]

In this building, behind a rarely-opened door, it is possible to see far down an outgoing corridor, with small lamps along the sides to provide illumination . . . according to the article.

-----The General Staff Academy [that is, a military college].

-----An emergency exit, somewhere in Solntsevo [a town just outside the Moscow Peripheral Highway http://www.fh.huji.ac.il/~solntsev/moscow.jpg ; a reputed stronghold of “mafia” (criminal gang) activity].

-----The “government” [that is, “non-civilian”] airport, Vnukovo-2. [This was opened to civilian use following the fall of the USSR; and yes, just like the FSB: website, website, they’ve got a website! http://www.vnukovo-airport.ru/eng/index.html ]

The article comments on discrepancies related to the alignment of the Moscow Metro Line 1 (Sokol’nicheskaya) extension from Park Kultury http://beeflowers.com/Metro/ParkKultury/mainpage.htm to Universitet http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-1-17 . The plan for this 6.5-km (4.0-mi) segment, described in a 1954 book differed significantly from what was built in 1957-1959. One very significant detail was the bridge over the Moscow River http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/strm09.jpg , incorporating Leninskiye Gory (today’s Vorob’yovy Gory) station, rather than a tunnel. (This station, on the lower level of a concrete arch bridge that carries a road on the upper level http://www.urbanrail.net/eu/mos/pix/L1-leninskie-gory.jpg , was closed from 1983 to 2002 owing to corrosion, caused by “high salt content” in the concrete. New bridges were built for road traffic and the metro station reopened thereafter http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-1-16 .)

The article refers to an “improbable” story about the Park Kultury – Universitet extension. This was planned for completion in 1957, in time for a youth festival. Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decreed that the cost of metro construction should be reduced. (Khrushchev, then the chairman of the Moscow City Soviet (“Soviet,” in Russian, means “Council”), http://www.soviethistory.org/index.php?action=L2&SubjectID=1934metro&Year=1934 , was one of the leaders of the initial Moscow Metro project http://www.schicklerart.com/auto_exh/RPCPolitics?id=2176922&from=2 .) Planners decided to use part of the Metro-2 tunnel already in existence (“Iosif”). A major incentive was use of the existing Metro-2 tunnel under the Moscow River, eliminating the need for a second river crossing. At the last moment came the decisive word from “competent authorities:” HET! (“nyet!”)

How much of this is true, and how much is the product of Russian storytelling, is anyone’s guess.

According to the article, “several things make it necessary to think, possibly, that there is some truth in all this.” The Moscow Metro’s Universitet station, planned originally for construction beneath the main building of Moscow State University (MGU), was instead built some distance to the south. The initial line of Metro-2 (“Iosif”) does pass beneath the main building, three levels underground, through the basement complex built using soil-freezing techniques. The third underground level (“sub-sub-basement”) is described as under KGB control. The article states that, according to U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency (http://www.dia.mil ) data, the location of the Metro-2 station beneath the “former residence of the first President of the USSR (Mikhail Gorbachev) is exactly that originally planned for the Moscow Metro Leninskiye Gory (Vorob’yovy Gory) station.

It is most likely, states the article, that the Moscow Metro extension from Park Kultury was started as a deep-level tunnel, but abandoned following Khrushchev’s order for sharp reductions in Moscow Metro construction costs. In response, a shallow alignment including the bridge over the Moscow River was built. Then, during the 1960s, the Kuntsevo underground command post http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/world/russia/kuntsevo.htm and the first line of Metro-2 (“Leonid”) were started. The deep-level alignment once planned for the Moscow Metro (and partially built, “to some unknown extent”) was incorporated into Metro-2

The article describes a connection near Sportivnaya station http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-1-15 as the only one between the “real” Moscow Metro and the elusive Metro Dva. The article also describes the location of Metro Dva ventilation shafts southwest of central Moscow.

The article also describes a large-scale construction project to extend Prospekt Vernadskogo, the road extending southwest from central Moscow that is paralleled in part by Moscow Metro Line 1. In 1978-1970, ravines, ponds and creeks in an area named “Salyuta” was filled in by “large quantities of soil, probably excavated during construction of the first line of Metro-2 and the underground city at Ramenki.”

Other details include location of a construction site, active until 1979, near the Yugo-Zapadnaya terminal http://metrowalks.ru/moscow/station-1-19 of Moscow Metro Line 1, and reports that the first line of Metro-2 (“Leonid”) was extended beyond Vnukovo-2 airport around 1986-1987 (the years during which “Yuri” was built). 

------------------------------

METRO-2, LINE 2 – “Yuri,” southward segment.

Opened at the beginning of 1987. Length: 60 km (40 mi), said to be the world’s longest subway tunnel.

[We have here in CCCP longest metro tunnel in world! But you may not see it!!] 

The line is described as extending southward from the Kremlin, parallel to the “Varshavskoye Shosse,” the Warsaw Chausee (highway) to the state guest house complex named “Bor;” (which means “Woods”) here is also located an “alternate command post” of the General Staff. It is probable, the article continues, that “Yuri” was extended to the new underground complex at Voronovo http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/world/russia/voronovo.htm , about 74 km (46 mi) south of the Kremlin, [presumably near Chekhov http://www.saratoga-chekhov.com/saratogas_visit.asp ]. The location of the construction base is described as “somewhere in Tsaritsino;” Tsaritsino is a district of southern Moscow, not far north of the peripheral highway, noted for an uncompleted 18th-century Imperial summer retreat http://www.talava.com/tsaritsyno.html .

The article makes clear that the author does not accept everything he reports as true. It describes reports that “Yuri” extends southward from Chekhov as “inaccurate.” Summer residents of Akachkovo describe a massive underground complex, perhaps thirty stories deep, described by eyewitnesses as “simply enormous” – no specific size, but “simply enormous.” Summer residents of Kryukovo say that they sometimes feel trains passing beneath them at night, and recall a major construction project during the early 1980s . . . “something” was dug, and it was very deep, with pits one after another, that is, in a line . . .

------------------------------

METRO-2, LINE 3, “Yuri,” eastward segment.

Also opened at the beginning of 1987. Length: 25 km (16 mi).

The line is described as extending from the Kremlin due northeast and east to Zarya, the underground “TsKP” or Central Control Center of Soviet air defense forces – “holy of holies of our defense forces,” as the article puts it. No one, not even “high government officials and important foreign guests” may visit without the personal permission of the Defense Minister. Elevators from the surface are described as reaching a depth of 122 meters (396 feet). Construction of the TsKP was started “as early as 1958,” according to the article; “The ‘Cold War’ could at any moment become nuclear, and the initial bombardments of the capital could leave the military blind, deaf and dumb. In order to prevent this, ‘they’ decided to build a formidable bunker, deep underground, from which to lead our troops. This underground city was constructed Stakhanov style: by 1961, the first “moles” celebrated completion of their new homes. Marshal Pavel F. Batitskiy, commander of the air defense forces, personally thanked ‘Metrostroyevtsam,’ the metro construction enterprise, for its role in building TsKP.” 

(If you’re in Moscow and have lots of hard currency to spend, you might want to check out some of the “state, departmental and private” museums http://www.rostourism.ru/museums.htm . For example, you can take a five-hour guided tour to the Air Defense History Museum at Zarya http://www.rostourism.ru/defense.htm ; oh, yes, allow 10-12 working days for the necessary permit. The charge for one person is $250 but that for 8-10 people is $440, so it pays to join a tour. Perhaps more of interest is the “The Yuri Gagarin Cosmonauts Training Center” http://howe.iki.rssi.ru/GCTC/gctc_e.htm ; this is better known in the West as “Star City” (Zvezdny Gorodok http://www.spaceadventures.com/media/info/destinations/starcity ; here is located the Yuri Gagarin Memorial Museum http://www.abamedia.com/rao/gallery/gagarin/ ). Six-hour guided tour, 5 working days required for permit, $500 for one person but $610 for 8-10 people.)

“Interesting” points en route along “Yuri-East” include “the Lubyanka” http://www.fas.org/irp/world/russia/kgb/lubyanka.htm , aka KGB headquarters, Dzerzhinskogo Ploshchad (named after Felix Dzerzhinsky http://www.angelfire.com/dc/1spy/Dzerzhinsky.html , one of Lenin’s henchmen who organized the Soviet intelligence apparatus; the square is once again known by its historic name, Lubyanskaya Ploshchad). Another, speculative, station location is Krasnye Vorota, said to be the site of an “enormous Stalin-era bunker” that has an entry from the platform of the Moscow Metro Krasniye Vorota station http://meta.metro.ru/moskva/krasvor.jpg (on the initial Line 1 segment opened in 1935). 

Farther away from the city center, the line is described as paralleling the Shosse [Chausee] Entusiastov, “Enthusiast’s Highway,” through Izmailovskiy Park. 

------------------------------

METRO-2, LINE 4 (“Boris”)

The article states that information about “Boris” is “almost invented” – which implies that only a few “improbable” details were available. The cost of construction was placed in the 1997 Russian budget, causing scandal and a hearing in the Russian Parliament, because some of the funds would be obtained from American credits (!!!!!). “Boris” is described as branching from “Leonid” in the Smolensk district (also known as “Kosygin”), extending under Park Pobedy, “sharing infrastructure with a planned branch of the ‘usual metro.’” It continues parallel to the Rublevskoye Shosse to a new bunker “next to Yeltsin’s house,” then to the sanatorium / bunker complex at Barvikhe (for an interesting commentary on dacha privileges as a driving force in Russian politics, pre- and post-1991, see here http://www.themoscowtimes.com/stories/2001/08/14/007.html ).

------------------------------

METRO-2: ADMINISTRATION

Metro-2, according to the article, was administered by the 15th Directorate of the Committee for State Security (KGB) prior to 1991, and has been administered by the Federal Security Bureau (FSB) since then. The article states that Metro Dva “has no relation” with the FSB “Headquarters of the President’s Special Programs” (GUSP), in conflict with other information online http://www.agentura.ru/english/dosie/gusp/ . Projects are managed within the Metro-2 administration itself, but staff are recruited from the ”usual metro” construction organization as needed. Metro-2 staff members live in Odintsovo, east of the Moscow peripheral highway (housing of staff employed by “secret” enterprises in a single location was used during the Brezhnev era as a means to control “leakage” of state secrets).

------------------------------

METRO-2: TECHNICAL DETAILS 

Metro-2 is not a “government metro” system, according to the article. It does not transport high-ranking officials during peacetime. Its “basic function” is “readiness for evacuation.” In addition, it transports freight and “service personnel.”

[Ah, but what sort of freight? Provisions and supplies for all those “underground facilities,” perhaps munitions as well.]

The entire system is single track; “it would be foolish to build for two-way traffic, because in the case of the “ATOM” signal or some other warning of disaster, all traffic will move in one direction.”

[The above passage is a bit unclear; it suggests that Metro Dva has no intermediate passing sidings, as at stations, that would permit two-way traffic. In any case, the single-track configuration rules out conversion to public passenger operation without great expense. Moscow will not be building a Paris-style RER network based on Metro Dva anytime soon.]

The article continues that in contrast to “the usual metro,” ventilation shafts are absent from Metro-2 tunnels. The air “down there” must be dank, stagnant, and uncomfortably warm during summer.

Metro Dva, according to the article, was constructed using the “closed” method, without intermediate shafts, as was the tunnel under “La Manche” (the English Channel). Outlying “stages” are not electrified – only the central segments have third rail.

Details of the “original” Metro Dva rolling stock are not known. Rolling-stock formations used on the second and third lines of Metro Dva (“Yuri”) included four cars: two accumulator (battery) – electric locomotives of type “L,” flanking two carriages of type EZh-B, EZh-E or the new series 81-174. Goods wagons (freight cars) are of series UP-2 and MK-2/15. From the beginning of the 1990s, scheduled maintenance was performed at the Moscow Metro Izmailovo depot.

(We’ve included the following links for the benefit of Intrepid Websurfers who would like to imagine what Metro-2 trains MIGHT look like – if 1.) trains resemble those used on the “real” Moscow Metro, and of course 2.) if Metro Dva exists.

(The initial Moscow Metro stock, Type A/B, built from 1934, worked until 1975: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg02.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type G stock, built from 1939, worked until 1983: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg04.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type V stock, built from 1947, worked until 1965: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg03.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type D stock, built from 1955, worked until 1995:
http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg05.jpg 

(Moscow Metro experimental Type E (Ye) stock, built 1959, worked until 1970: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg06.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type E (Ye) stock, built from 1963, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg07.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type Em (Ye-m) stock, built from 1966, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg08.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type Ezh (Ye-zh) stock, built from 1970, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg09.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-717 stock, built from 1976, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg10.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-714 stock, built from 1976, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg11.jpg 

(Moscow Metro experimental Type I stock, built 1973, not used in commercial service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg12.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type VEKA battery-electric locomotive, built 1992: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg13.jpg 

(Moscow Metro experimental Type 81-720.1 stock, built 1991, not used in commercial service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg14.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-720 stock, built from 1991, in service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg15.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-718 stock, built from 1991, not used in commercial service: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/vg16.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-740 stock (“Scythian”), built from 2002, trial operation: http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/skif250303.jpg 

(Moscow Metro Type 81-740/741 (“Scythian”): http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/11/alexd_06.jpg 

Metro-2 stations are described as resembling the usual “three-arch” (view of Arbatskaya station http://www.metropoliten.newmail.ru/mm2000.html ) design of deep-level stations on “the usual” Moscow Metro, with an overall size 1.5 times that of the usual metro tunnels.


The item published by The Washington Times to the effect that Russia is continuing to implement Cold War programs -- envisioning, in particular, the building of underground bunkers, tunnels, and so forth -- is, to all appearances, only partially correct. In an interview with Interfax a Russian tunneling expert, who wished to remain anonymous, did not deny The Washington Times report on the completion of a bunker near the village of Voronovo, 74 km south of Moscow. The paper maintains that it acquired this information from a secret CIA report. According to the Interfax source, construction in the area of Voronovo has already been completed or is at the final stage. "This installation is a component of an underground strategic structure comprising several key points which permit control of vital state systems, including those located at a considerable distance (up to several hundred kilometers) from Moscow," the source said. At the same time he categorically denied The Washington Times's assertion about a secret Metro line being laid from the Park Pobedy station to Russian President Boris Yeltsin's dacha near Moscow. According to the source, construction is under way on the main section of the Mitino line that runs via Park Pobedy and Kuntsevo from the deep-lying Kievskaya Radialnaya station, where, according to plans dating back to the early 1950's that were subsequently abandoned, one of the bunkers to be used in the event of a nuclear war was to be located. "There are no government Metro lines in the western part of Moscow," the source said.
This does not mean, however, that there are altogether no such lines in the capital. "The first section of the 'Kremlin line' (Metro-2), commissioned in 1967, linked the Central Committee building on Staraya Ploshchad and the Kremlin with an underground town at Ramenki and Vnukovo-2 Airport," the source said, noting that this line links up with the Moscow Metro only in one place -- near the Sportivnaya station. Subsequently, in his words, several spur tracks were built from the main Metro-2 line to installations of state importance. "Yet neither the homes nor the dachas of top state leaders are among such installations," the source said.

Metro still lets Muscovites dream
The Moscow metro is perhaps the only vehicle in the world that tourists are so interested in, as soon as museums and architectural monuments are truly a masterpiece of Soviet art, which was conceived not as a vehicle, but as something that should transform people's consciousness and transfer it from daily routine in the ideological realm. The history of the construction of the subway began in the thirties, and, paradoxically, the world's first atheistic state was guided by the religious heritage of antiquity. So the subway resembles an underground complex of temples, in which the believer is transported from one sanctuary to another, or the Roman catacombs, in which the first Christians gathered, and where a civilization originated, replacing antiquity. So are the Moscow catacombs, decorated with marble and granite,

Strange hybrids
The first stations of the Moscow metro are strange hybrids from the shrines of the Aztecs and Greek temples. Instead of gods, there are statues of heroes in wall niches: armed sailors, soldiers and peasants in bronze sandals. The aesthetics of the metro is in no way a result of creative freedom, it primarily stems from complex political considerations. Before the opening of the Ploshchad Revolutsii metro station, for example, the ideological commission wanted to remove the statues from there, as they showed the Soviet man in a half-bent position almost on his knees. Stalin himself prevented this by saying that the statues look as if they were alive. Bronze gods survived Stalin and the Soviet Union, the muzzle of their revolvers, polished with millions of hands, are still aimed at the crowd.
Moscow metro is inhabited by two types of statues: writers and poets from the pantheon of Soviet culture and unnamed heroes of war and labor. Mosaics on the walls of the subway are often abstract geometric patterns, in which Soviet symbols are woven like a sickle and a hammer or a five-pointed star, and they are woven so subtly that an amazing effect is obtained: when you pass them, to some degree you feel the ideological radiance of these walls. Sometimes you have to look closely at them before you understand why an abstract mosaic awakens thoughts about the high ground of a communist idea. Next to the ornaments filled with ideology, there are mosaics worked with magic signs - walls are decorated with ancient symbols, kabalistic motifs, runes, and more.
But some stations deliberately used examples from ancient architecture, some resemble the palace of Knossos with the labyrinth of the Minotaur, and the Kropotkinskaya station with its double colonnade resembles the interior of an Egyptian temple, just lighting it not with torches, but electric lamps. Officially, you can take pictures here only with special permission. The reason for this lies partly in the strategic value of the metro: in the fifties and sixties, the stations were re-equipped as atomic bomb shelters. At the beginning and at the end of each apron, heavy metal doors are mounted, with which the stations can be hermetically closed. Except for a few specialists, no one saw these doors closed, but you can imagine such a terrible situation: a crowd going down on an escalator, behind which metal doors are closed half a meter thick. However, it is quite possible that these doors have long been inoperative.
If you take the subway from the center to the outskirts, then the half-hour trip will be a journey through time: from the thirties to the present. Chic and pump are replaced by asceticism, even by scarcity, and the farther you go from the center, the less often you meet aboveground metro buildings - the entrances here are just underground passages, above which the red letter “M” is lit. In the center of the station they look like small mausoleums, but Lenin's mausoleum looks like a metro station. In general, the metro, which has long been named after Lenin, is a virtual mausoleum - a mausoleum of ideas, a mausoleum of the future, a mausoleum of dreams.
Like every iconic object, the subway is covered with grim legends. So go the stories that in the underground system of tunnels live huge mutant rats the size of a small dog, who from time to time sit on the rails and make the train stop. At night, special brigades, armed with Kalashnikov assault rifles and large lanterns, shooting rats pass through the tunnels. It is said that rats feed on corpses that are thrown from the windows of trains at night. Somewhere in the center of Moscow there should be an abandoned station, the platforms of which are filled with all those monuments to Stalin, which in the fifties were removed from the city (this is unlikely, but many stations still have huge portraits of Stalin, which could easily be cleaned of a thick layer of plaster.)
But the most beautiful and the most terrible legend about the Moscow metro was invented by children; This is one of the horror stories that were told in the pioneer camps. When it became dark in the ward, stories began of what happens to people who fall asleep in trains and miss the terminal station. When the train enters the subway, people are woken up, pulled out of the cars and put on a chain. After that, they spend many years under the earth, working and repairing those mysterious mechanisms that set the huge body of the subway in motion. All this time they are, as it were, in a trance, because something is being poured into their food. When they grow old and can no longer work, they one day wake up in a crowded carriage, in the midst of people going to work. They do not remember anything about their life underground, it’s just clear to them that they were young and full of hope yesterday, and today is old men. Their life is over, and they absolutely do not understand what happened between yesterday and today.

Soviet Hades
This story is a wonderful metaphor: a lot of elderly people ride the subway, and when they look at billboards on the walls of cars, their faces reflect alienation and incomprehension. It is possible that people from that story would have the same facial expression. They spent their entire lives in the immense machinery of the Soviet empire; their days, indistinguishable from each other, passed in the same ideological trance. And now, in old age, they were thrown into an incomprehensible, hostile world, which expects from them only that they quickly leave and give place to others. According to Soviet metaphysics, man after death lives in the fruits of his labors. In this sense, the metro is the Soviet Hades, home to all those many souls who have nothing left but the dark dampness of the underground tunnel.
But God is merciful. At the deepest station of the Moscow metro, Mayakovskaya station, oval windows offer views from a dark plastered ceiling to a painted blue sky, with airplanes, colorful balloons and branches of blossoming apple trees. Perhaps the builders of the metro of the thirties, forties and fifties, all those people whose monument is the Moscow metro, went precisely there, to this painted blue, into the subterranean sky with pink clouds of eternal sunset.

The classified places in the Moscow metro were already before his birth in 1935. In the project of the second stage there was the Sovetskaya station under Sovetskaya Sq. between the stations "Theater" (in those days, "Sverdlov Square") and "Mayakovskaya." In the process of construction, according to Stalin’s personal order, the Sovetskaya was adapted for the underground command post of the Moscow Civil Defense Headquarters. The unjustifiably long distillery in the very center of Moscow, which arose as a result of its closure, was liquidated only on July 15, 1979 by the construction of the Gorkovskoye - Tverskoy. The implementation of this project has been very expensive, even at times of stagnation. If you carefully look at the stage in front of "Tverskaya", you can see traces of "Soviet".
Next was the pre-war (and also the post-war) modernization project of the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya to connect the Kremlin with both Stalinist bunkers. Before the war, Stalin planned to build the largest stadium, not only for the expected Olympics. On the idea of the stadium of the USSR (or the Peoples), it was prompted by mass propaganda events, often held by the Nazis in Germany for the German people and so beloved by the Fuhrer. Under the future stadium (a piece of which was nevertheless built), a bunker for Stalin was erected with a small performance hall and a tunnel to the stands. Two automobile tunnels were built: to the Kremlin (with the tunnel gates located just below the Spassky Gate) and to the Sokolniki metro station area. There is a transition from the "Izmailovo Park" to the bunker. The average route at the station, except for the planned large passenger traffic, carried the function of the special way of Stalin during solemn events. Pay attention to the elegant light bulbs illuminating the middle path. They are not on extreme paths. A similar Stalin's bunker was built under his dacha at Kuntsevo (there also goes a road tunnel from the public reception of the Defense Ministry at Myasnitskaya 37 through the Kremlin). Only Emergencies Ministry specialists know about him: right above him is the Central Regional Center of this department. About suspiciousness of Stalin is known. From the first days of the war, he hesitated to stay in the capital or to leave with the government in Kuibyshev (now Samara). A similar Stalin's bunker was built under his dacha at Kuntsevo (there also goes a road tunnel from the public reception of the Defense Ministry at Myasnitskaya 37 through the Kremlin). Only Emergencies Ministry specialists know about him: right above him is the Central Regional Center of this department. About suspiciousness of Stalin is known. From the first days of the war, he hesitated to stay in the capital or to leave with the government in Kuibyshev (now Samara). A similar Stalin's bunker was built under his dacha at Kuntsevo (there also goes a road tunnel from the public reception of the Defense Ministry at Myasnitskaya 37 through the Kremlin). Only Emergencies Ministry specialists know about him: right above him is the Central Regional Center of this department. About suspiciousness of Stalin is known. From the first days of the war, he hesitated to stay in the capital or to leave with the government in Kuibyshev (now Samara).
When the bombing of Moscow increased, he ordered the construction of a bomb shelter, which was dug in Kuntsevo at a depth of fifteen meters. In order to fully protect the leader, cast iron rails were used as floors. According to EMERCOM Colonel Sergey Cherepanov, the construction will still withstand a direct hit by an aerial bomb. The entrance to the bunker is an ordinary door, which you will meet in any staircase, with a combination lock. A very clean staircase with railings leads underground. It feels like you are going down to the basement of an ordinary apartment building. Stalin did not go up the stairs. Especially for him, an elevator was started, where parquet was laid, the walls were sheathed in wooden panels. The elevator connected the bomb shelter with Stalin's dacha, under which the bunker was dug. In order to exclude Joseph Stalin’s occasional meetings with service personnel, several corridors were built. In the corridor for diesel operators, cooks and others, the walls were covered with white tiles. Stalin, on the other hand, walked from the elevator along the parquet floor and surveyed the marble walls. In the bomb shelter, Joseph Stalin held a meeting of the Council of Defense. For this, a spacious room was allotted - the “Generals'”. Its walls are decorated with oak and Karelian birch. In the middle - an oval oak table. There are tables for officers and stenographers on the wall. Eight-hulled chandeliers remained in the bomb shelter from the war. And only a rectangular shape of modern fluorescent lamps remind that the yard is not 1942. A small corridor separated from the meeting room the bedroom of the leader. The bedroom is very small. It contained only a bed and a bedside table. In the bomb shelter, Joseph Stalin held a meeting of the Council of Defense. For this, a spacious room was allotted - the “Generals'”. Its walls are decorated with oak and Karelian birch. In the middle - an oval oak table. There are tables for officers and stenographers on the wall. Eight-hulled chandeliers remained in the bomb shelter from the war. And only a rectangular shape of modern fluorescent lamps remind that the yard is not 1942. A small corridor separated from the meeting room the bedroom of the leader. The bedroom is very small. It contained only a bed and a bedside table. In the bomb shelter, Joseph Stalin held a meeting of the Council of Defense. For this, a spacious room was allotted - the “Generals'”. Its walls are decorated with oak and Karelian birch. In the middle - an oval oak table. There are tables for officers and stenographers on the wall. Eight-hulled chandeliers remained in the bomb shelter from the war. And only a rectangular shape of modern fluorescent lamps remind that the yard is not 1942. A small corridor separated from the meeting room the bedroom of the leader. The bedroom is very small. It contained only a bed and a bedside table. And only a rectangular shape of modern fluorescent lamps remind that the yard is not 1942. A small corridor separated from the meeting room the bedroom of the leader. The bedroom is very small. It contained only a bed and a bedside table. And only a rectangular shape of modern fluorescent lamps remind that the yard is not 1942. A small corridor separated from the meeting room the bedroom of the leader. The bedroom is very small. It contained only a bed and a bedside table.because ofThis bunker was launched 05/04/1953 mysterious plot of the deep foundation "Square of the Revolution" - "Kiev". Stalin was afraid of a repetition of the incident with the bomb falling into the overlap of a tunnel on the stretch between Smolensk and Arbat. The site was built in record time, in less than two years, despite the fact that the route was held in extremely adverse hydrogeological conditions. For the first time it was necessary to solve the problem of pairing tunnels of two radii - the current and the new, without stopping normal movement. To do this, they built a tunnel of increased diameter, which, as it were, contained the existing tunnel. The tunnel for the "Kiev" was passed further right up to Victory Park. According to the plan of 1932, the line to Kuntsevo and Krylatskoye was supposed to be completely underground. And she had to pass next to the dacha of Stalin. When they built a new express line to Kuntsevskaya, this tunnel was used. This explains such a strange choice of track.
For the first time about the Kremlin evacuation metro tunnel, going far beyond Moscow, I heard in  81-82  years from my uncle, an electronics engineer, who was then working in one of the “boxes” connected with computers for the army. The information was imprinted in the brain and became one of the reasons for my love for shastany in the dungeons. The first serious information about these metro-tunnels appeared in 92 in one of the AIF numbers. There's some kind of aunt wrote that her friend was working as a cleaner in the KGB and its sensitive sites were taken on specific subway lines. AiF answered that this system is described in the 1991 annual publication of the US Department of Defense for the Soviet Armed Forces. The weekly published a simplified map and a list of lines as of 91.

In 92 subject picked up by other publications. With a light hand of the magazine "Spark" system called Metro-2 . Through the efforts of the yellow press, an unreal amount of nonsense and tales was floated, making the majority of Muscovites doubt the existence of the system. There are also a couple of articles that I haven’t yet read: “In the second circle” in Moscow News for 02.08.92 and in Komsomolskaya Pravda in  one of the Saturday numbers in the fall of 92 on page 3. The theme was worked out in 92 in its plots Saturday TV program "Center". In 1993 and later, the topic about Metro-2  almost completely disappeared from the press, someone , apparently, very seriously pressed.
The Metro-2 scheme , exhibited in many places on the Internet, was compiled by me in 1995 on the basis of this map and other data that I had collected by that time and in most cases erroneous. Because of this, many errors have crept into the circuit. I have plans to prepare a new scheme in the near future.
So, Metro-2
Line 1
Put into operation in 1967 (presumably, that some part was put into operation earlier). The length is 27 km. Stations:
* 		Kremlin
* 		Library them. Lenin (for evacuation to the underground city in Ramenki of all readers who are in the halls at the time of the Atom signal; perhaps the Kremlin station and the Library are the same station)
* 		The yellow house with a turret on the Smolensk Square of the project of academician Zholtovsky (this is a special house, it has entrances to 2 metro systems: to the Filyovsky line and  Metro-2 , because of the elevators to the Metro-2 station  in this house, legends about such stations Do not under each nomenclature house in Moscow)
* 		former residence of the first and last President of the USSR on the Lenin Hills
* 		underground city under Ramenki (max. capacity  12,000–15,000  inhabitants) with a pedestrian tunnel to the main building of Moscow State University (entrance at the checkpoint of zone B)
* 		Academy of the FSB and the Institute of Cryptography, Communications and Informatics of the FSB of Russia (a huge brick building at the entrance to the Olympic Village. In one of the open gates in the building you can see far down the long corridor illuminated by small lights on the sides)
* 		Academy of General Staff
* 		emergency exit somewhere in Solntsevo
* 		government airport Vnukovo-2
In the book "Moscow Metro" in 1954 describes the fifth stage of construction of the subway. If everything is clear with the Shcherbakovsky (now Riga) radius, the continuation of the Frunze radius bewilders. An unrealized version with a tunnel under the Moscow River is described. The length of the section is 6.5 km. "Frunzenskaya" is on the plan in the same place where it is now. “Usachevskaya” either became “Sport”, or it should have been closer to Bolshaya Pirogovskaya. "Luzhnikovskaya" was supposed to be at the entrance to the stadium in Luzhniki on Novoluzhnetsk. The ground-level lobbies of the “Lenin Mountains” were planned on the slopes of the Sparrow Hills and on the side of the Vorobyevskoye Highway (Kosygin St.). The "University" is planned next to the main building of Moscow State University.
In 1957 and 1959 everything was built differently .
There is an implausible story about the construction of a branch from “Culture Park” to “University” to the youth festival of 1957. In the spirit of Khrushchev's decisions about cheaper construction, the designers decided to pave part of the passenger route along the Metro-2 tunnel already built by that time. first line. It would seem that there is a ready-made tunnel dug up near the Moskva River, which means that you will not need to spend time and money on building a new crossing through this water barrier. But at the very last moment the “competent authorities” said resolutely: no! And there was a fever, changing the project, taking the new subway route aside and constructing the metro bridge with the Leninskie Gory station. The characteristic bend of this metro line near the Sportivnaya station and the perishing miracle bridge, which was erected in a hurry with violations of the construction technology, remained in memory of that long-standing "discrepancy". Frankly, I didn’t particularly believe in this story, but a few things make you think, maybe there’s some truth in all this.
Initially, the "University" wanted to build next to the MSU MS. But after all, the first line of Metro-2,  just under the state of emergency, passes through, more precisely, through basement 3 or level-3 , where cryogenic plants for the generation of liquid nitrogen for soil freezing are located. Entrance through the checkpoint of zone B of the main building. By the way, in the first basement, almost exactly under the checkpoint of zone B there is a door with a combination lock and a television camera.
According to the American DIA (Defense Intelligence Agency), the Metro-2 station of the  first line is located under the former residence of the first and last President of the USSR (Gorbachev) in the Lenin Hills, and this is exactly the place where the Leninsky Gory station was planned.
Most likely, projects of tunnels and deep-laid stations were developed. Then Khrushchev ordered sharply reduce the cost of construction. Then a miracle bridge was erected, in which there is more salt than concrete. And the bend with the rise after the "Sport" appeared. But already in the  60s , when the bunker in Kuntsevo and the first line of Metro-2  were built, then the old projects were raised. What is the point of duplicating work? And leisurely tunnel zababahali on old projects, but single-track.
If you go from “Sportivnaya” to “University”, then on the left along the course after “Sportivnaya” you can first see the stretch connecting the path you are on with the opposite one. Then you see a branch to the left along the train. Officially, this is a reversible deadlock, but it continues further, it descends between the main tunnels under the river and in an arc steeply drifts away. The contact rail in this tunnel terminates. The tunnel itself ends up against a steel gate. This is the only gate of the usual metro and  Metro-2  in Moscow.
When planning the construction of the Temple in honor of the victory in the Patriotic War of 1812, there were several projects, one of them - to build a temple on the Sparrow Hills. Construction has not begun, because there are very weak soils that are not able to withstand a large building. But what the royal architects could not do was done by Stalin. When the main building of Moscow State University was built, they dug a huge foundation pit, filled it with liquid nitrogen, then put the refrigeration units on the place that later became known as the 3rd basement or floor -3. This zone was given the status of super-secret, since in the event of possible sabotage and disabling freezers in a week the building will float to the Moskva River. Head of the 3rdbasement 15 of the KGB. It is this level of Moscow State University that is connected to the underground city in Ramenki and the Metro-2 station .
You can see the ventilation shafts of the metro station at the Teparevskaya railway station, behind the Academy of the General Staff. The Academy of the General Staff itself is a building with a central building and side quarters. If you look from the street, then they have 5 floors, but in fact a lot more. The elevator goes underground for a few more. Below there are many very well-protected places where almost no one can get. From some sources it was drawn out that this is the exit to  Metro-2 .
When there was no "Pr. Vernadsky ", on the site of" Salute "was a grandly rugged terrain: ravines, a cascade of ponds, a river. In  68-70  it was all neatly covered with a large amount of soil, probably taken from the construction of the first line and the underground city in Ramenki.
If you draw a line from the "South-West" in Ochakovo and put off 500 meters, we get to the place where there was something like a concrete factory with a lift with a wheel at the top. Every morning, a terrible crowd went downstairs. It lasted until 79 years.
The main construction base of the first line is that notorious concrete plant south of Moscow State University. It is there that materials are imported and land is exported.
There is evidence that the first line in  1986-87  extended. There are two interesting places in the Moscow region. This is the military town of Vlasiha (aka Odintsovo-10 ). There in  58-64  built the command complex of the Strategic Missile Forces with a  4-tier bunker and the residence of their commander. In  1986–87,  a new 12-tier bunker was built two kilometers from the old one. Rails down there saw exactly. There is also a place Golitsyno-2 , MCC military space forces. Quite interesting - the entrances to the bunker in small houses, like residential ones. There is one square in the town on which there is a monument - an ancient radar station, that’s where it is. People working there are reliably aware that this is where the branch passes Vnukovo-2 .
Directly in 1987, Odintsovo itself began to build a residential area “new houses” for the builders of Metro-2 . The station is there too.
Line 2
Cdana at the beginning of '87. The length is 60 km (it turns out that the world record in metro tunnels). It starts from the Kremlin, then to the south, parallel to the Warsaw highway through Vidnoe to the Bor boarding house (there is a reserve command post of the General Staff).
There is a canned station on the line, to which the most mysterious transition from the “Tretyakov” Kalininskaya line leads.
It is likely that the line should extend to the new bunker Raven ( somewhere in the 74 kilometers south of the Kremlin). There is still inaccurate information that the line goes somewhere behind Chekhov. The summer residents from Alachkovo tell about the local military town that they have an underground structure that goes underground on 30 floors, they say, they were in such a teaching: standing in a huge hall (the eyewitness could not say, but says “just huge”) the composition of the subway is set on fire, and then extinguished. Those who live in Kryukovo (that of Chekhov) sometimes wake up at night because the train passes under them. Vacationers in Vidnoe say that in the early 80's there have something to dig very deep. Remember only in a few places the pits are large and deep, but the walls are planked orsomething else was fortified there, and the pits were one after another, that is, on one line.
The construction base of the second line is located somewhere in Tsaritsyno.
Line 3
Cdana, too, at the beginning of '87. The length is 25 km. It starts from the Kremlin, then Lubyanka (maybe there is a station at the Bolshoi Theater, since it was possible to get into the Metro-2 tunnel from the fountain on Teatralnaya Square.), the air defense headquarters of the Moscow Military District on Myasnitskaya, 33 (located adjacent to the public reception of the Defense Ministry on Myasnitskaya, 37, which in turn has a car tunnel to Stalin’s dacha in Kuntsevo. The trains did not stop there, the apron was fenced off from the tracks by a high plywood wall. After the war, traces of this activity were destroyed for a long time. A new bunker was built for the air defense headquarters and 33 at the station and building on Myasnitskaya Street. Shta b Air Force and Air Defense) in the village of Zarya Balashikha district, where there is a military town with 20,000 inhabitants.
The line runs parallel to Entuziastov Highway and through Izmailovsky Park. Most likely, it has a station next to the “Red Gate” (this is questionable, but there is an enormous Stalinist bunker there - with a cruise access to the “Red Gate” platform).
People working in the bunker of Zarya are called “moles”. And also - by miners. Every day they enter a seemingly inconspicuous brick house and descend to a depth of 122 meters on high-speed elevators. The last document check, a machine gun next to a small border post, massive iron doors that automatically shut at the first danger, and our heroes find themselves at one of Russia's most secret military sites. This underground city is the Central Command Point (TsKP) of the air defense forces, the holy of holies of our defensive might. Even the first state officials and important foreign guests cannot get here. For any tour you need a personal permission of the Minister of Defense. The party ordered to bury ourselves in the land in 1958. All the General Staffs and TsKP urgently began to move in the near suburbs. The "cold" war at any moment could turn into a nuclear war, and the very first bombardments of the capital could leave the army without "eyes", "ears" and "language". In order to prevent this, they decided to urgently bury all the most valuable things in the ground, and to lead the troops from powerful bunkers. Underground city builtStakhanov : already in the  61st year, the first “moles” celebrated housewarming. For this, thanks to the Marshal of the Soviet Union Pavel Batitsky and the metro-builders - they were invited to perform an important task of the Motherland. In the bunker city, everything is provided to survive the end of the world: its own power plants, fire extinguishing systems, water and air purification, sewage systems, food supplies. They say there are even places where you can sleep in comfort and with white linen. Even women who work here do not particularly complain about the conditions. The transport problem in the "city", built on 1100 people, is also solved. The staff has four elevators - two passenger and two freight.
Line 4
The information about her is almost fictional. In the budget of Russia in 1997 the sum was laid for its construction. Moreover, this fact caused a scandal and proceedings in Congress, because they had to be built with American loans. It will start in the Smolenskaya or Kosygin area as a branch from the first line, then under Victory Park (where it will use the infrastructure together with the planned regular metro line) to the new A-50 GO bunker   on Rublyovskoye Highway, 48 - next to Yeltsin’s house Autumn Boulevard. Then a sanatorium / bunker complex in Barvikha.
The entire Metro-2 system  was previously under the administration of the 15th KGB administration (dungeons). This control subsequently passed under the wing of the FSB. The Office of the President, headed by P. Borodin, Metro-2 has  nothing to do. He built and builds a box where people are recruited from the ordinary metrostroy. And they live, as I already wrote, in Odintsovo.
The system is little known, since it is not a government metro, that is, it does not transport senior government officials (including Yeltsin) in peacetime. The main function is readiness for evacuation. In addition - economic transportation: goods, attendants, etc.
The whole system is single-track (it’s stupid to build 2 paths, since even in the case of the “Atom” signal - evacuation in case of nuclear war or something terrible - the entire traffic flow is directed in one direction). Unlike the usual metro, there are no ventilation shafts from the tunnels. Construction was carried out by a closed method, and without intermediate mines (as a tunnel under the English Channel ). Contact rail on long hauls is not used - only on central ones. One of the second or third metro components consists of 4 cars - at the ends there are two contact-battery electric locomotives “L”, in the center are 2 saloon cars with curtains E6, made on the basis of the E3 series with new nodes from  81-714 . The line-up was scheduled for repair at the Izmailovo metro depot at the beginning of the 90s .
There is also information about the Metro-2 cars  from one informed comrade from the Moscow Metro administration. All this was released between 1986 and 1987 in Mytishchi, just when 2 and 3 Metro-2 lines were built :
0087 Battery Contact Locomotive "L".
0087 Battery terminal locomotive "L".
0088 Battery Contact Locomotive "L".
0089 Battery Contact Locomotive "L".
0090 Wagon series Ezh6.
0091 Wagon series Ezh6.
0092 Carriage series Ezh6.
0093 Wagon series Ezh6.
For transportation of household goods, UI-2  or MK 2/15 trailed platforms are used .
The tunnels for Metro-2 stations  are made of tubing 1.5 times more than tunnels. They remind the traveling hall (third) of a usual 3-vaulted deep -laid station. The exception should be stations under the library to them. Lenin, the Kremlin and Ramenki.

When passing through the turnstile on the back of one-time magnetic cards (for 1, 5, 10 and 20 trips), the letter “M” is printed, the four-digit code of the vestibule (the three-digit station code and the number of the vestibule is 1, 2 or 3), date and time of passage and the number of remaining trips. This information is printed line by line.
On magnetic cards for 60 trips, a three-digit station code, a four-digit turnstile code and the number of trips remaining are printed. Information on three passes through the turnstile is printed on one line.
On monthly travel tickets from the back side, nothing is printed.
Code 0011 belongs to the station "Ulitsa Podbelskogo", the lobby is in the direction of a dead end, but it happens that the turnstiles at other stations also print this code or 0000. This code also belongs to the server of the electrical workshops of the metro. If the validator prints this code, then it has no connection with the center and it is not loaded for a specific station.

Over 60 years:
* 		transported more than 86 billion passengers;
* 		about 111 million trains were missed, of which 99.93% proceeded strictly on schedule;
* 		electricity saved 515 million kWh.
Among the subways of the Russian Federation, the average daily transportation of passengers by the Moscow metro is about 80%, which is almost 5.4 times higher than the average daily transportation of St. Petersburg and 29 times - of the Novosibirsk subways.
1. RED                                                            Kashira (highway/tract n.a. town) ((Town in Moscow region             Kutuzov (avenue n.a. general) ((Commander-in-chief in the
Rokossovky Bd. (marshal) ((One of the most prominent              n.a. river, origin of the name unknown, balt. or turk. First          war of 1812 with Napoleon. The Fili council on surrendering
commanders in the Great Patriotic War, known especially for       mentioned in 1356.))                                                  Moscow took place in this district, many streets of which
1944 Bagration Operation against Germany.))                       Kantemirov (n.a. tank division) ((N.a. village of Kantemirovka,       bear names related to this war.))
Cherkizton (n.a. village) ((N.a. its former owner Serkiz, a       Voronezh region, which it had liberated from German                   Fili (district) ((N.a. village originally known as 'Hvilya', most
Tatar prince that went to Muscovy and became an Orthodox          troops.))                                                             likely a dialectism for foul weather.))
Christian in 14 c.))                                              Tsarina's (estate, museum and park) ((N.a. Catherine the              Bagration (general) ((One of the most prominent figures in
Transfiguration of Jesus Sq. ((N.a. village n.a. church.          Great, 18-c. empress.))                                               the war of 1812 with Napoleon. Pro-partisan.))
Founded by the 17-c. tsar Alexis.))                               Hazelby (n.a. village) ((First mentioned in 16 c., excavated          Fili Park ((Several historic sites are located in the vast park
Falconers (n.a. hunting grounds) ((The forest that had been a     Slavic settlements date to 12 c.))                                    area. The park itself was founded in 17 c. by a Peter I's
historical hunting ground. Now a park.))                          Household-Old-Man-by ((N.a. village n.a. legendary nick               relative.))
Red Village (district) ((Red meant 'beautiful' in old Russian.    name. First mentioned in 1401.))                                      Pioneer ((N.a. Soviet 'pioneer' movement for children
The village is first mentioned in 1423.))                         Red Guards (former district) ((Paramilitary volunteer                 indoctrination celebrating its anniversary around the time
Komsomol (square) ((All-Union Leninist Young Communist            formations of Bolsheviks during the October Revolution and            the station was commissioned.))
League, Soviet youth organisation abbreviated to                  Civil War in 1917.))
‘Komsomol’.))                                                     Alma-Ata (city) ((Alma-Ata -- the biggest city in Kazakhstan;         5. BROWN (RING)
Red Gate ((N.a. triumphal arch on the way to Red Village in       station named in exchange of gestures between the                     (stations not mentioned as part of other lines)
honour of 1709 Poltava victory over Sweden. Demolished in         countries with one of the Alma-Ata Metro stations receiving           New Sloboda (St.) ((N.a. New Dmitrov sloboda (a semi-
1928.))                                                           the name 'Moscow'.))                                                  autonomous settlement) (16-18 c.).))
Clear Ponds ((Cleared in 18 or 19 c. A popular promenade. In                                                                            Red Freshwater (St.) ((Formerly Big Freshwater St. n.a. a
the 90s was a place of meetings of punks, goths, etc.))           3. BLUE                                                               nearby river. Renamed in 1918 for ideological reasons.))
Bast Works (Sq.) ((N.a. Novgorod district of the same name        Schelkovo (highway) ((N.a. city in Moscow region n.a. certain         Dobrynin (Sq.) ((Soviet-era name of Serpukhov Sq. (see
at the time of Novgorod people migration to Moscow.               Sholokhov before 15 c., origin unknown.))                             Serpukhov, line 9) referred to Dobrynin, an October 1917
Lubyanka is also used to refer to FSB (KGB) headquartered         First of May (street) ((First of May (Labour day) -- an               revolutionary.)
on this Sq. ))                                                    important Soviet holiday.))
Hunters Row (St.) ((N.a. merchants row where the meat of          Izmaelovo (n.a. park, avenue) ((N.a. village known from 1389          6. ORANGE + 12. LIGHTEST BLUE
wild animals and fowl were traded in 17 c.))                      and later as a royal estate, origin uncertain.))                      Bearton (village) ((N.a. its owner prince Pozharsky
Lenin Library ((Currently Russian State Library, the largest      Partisan ((Renamed in 2005: a nearby park is a place of               nicknamed Medved ('bear') in 16 c.))
library in Russia founded in 1862.))                              meeting of partisan (resistance) veterans of WWII.))                  Babushkin (district) ((N.a. Mikhail Babushkin, a Soviet polar
Kropotkin (anarchist) ((N.a. St renamed in 1921 in honour of      Semyonov (square) ((Known from 18 c. as a part of Peter I's           aviator, b. 1893, that took part in many major expeditions in
a renowned 19-c. anarchist theorist and geographer.))             soldiers sloboda of the same name. The regiment                       the Arctic.))
Culture Park ((Culture and Leisure Park also known as Gorky       accommodated here was one of the two in Peter’s toy army              Svibleton (district) ((N.a. owner, a boyar nicknamed ‘lispy’ or
Park (opened in 1928).))                                          that went on to become imperial army.))                               ‘tongue tied’ (old russ.) tracing his lineage to one of the
Frunze (revolutionary) ((N.a. nearby streets renamed in 1936      Electric Plant ((Moscow Electric Lamp Plant (1907) - the              fellows of the famed count Dmitry Donskoy.))
in honour of the Soviet statesman and military commander          oldest electronics industry enterprise in Russia.))                   Botanical garden ((Moscow Botanical Garden of Academy of
in Civil War.))                                                   Bauman (revolutionary) ((Known for being killed in 1905               Sciences, 3.61 km2, founded in 1945.))
Sports (n.a. Luzhniki) ((N.a. Luzhniki sport complex that         while leading a protest and shouting 'Away with the Tsar!'. A         VDNKh ((A Soviet 'Exhibition of Achievements of National
hosted 1980 Olympics.))                                           bystanding monarchist tried to take away his flag, Bauman             Economy', currently a park and a venue for trade fairs.))
Vorobyov Mountains ((N.a. village n.a. boyars with the last       attempted to shoot him, but the man counterattacked                   Alekseyton (n.a. village) ((First mentioned in 14 c. Aleksey is
name deriving from 'sparrow'. Royal residence from 14 c. to       'exceeding necessary defence'.))                                      a popular male first name.))
18 c. A BC hillfort.))                                            Kursk (railway station n.a. city) ((A city in Western Russia          Riga (railway station n.a. city) ((Riga - a capital of Latvia, ca.
University ((Moscow State University, founded in 1755, the        with a population of ca. 450,000.))                                   640,000. Trains from the station (1901) depart in the north-
oldest in Russia.))                                               Revolution Sq. ((Renamed in 1918 as a site of heated                  western direction.))
Vernadsky Ave. (scientist) ((A 19-20 c. scientist deemed to be    confrontation during October Revolution (former                       World/Peace Avenue ((A common Soviet name for an
one of the founders of geochemistry, biogeochemistry and          Resurrection Sq.).))                                                  avenue after 1957 World Festival of Youth when the Soviet
radiogeology. Author of 'The Biosphere'.))                        Suburbs (arab.) ((The name supposed to be given to the area           Union opened its doors to foreigners for the first time to
South-Western (district)                                          by Oriental merchants. A renowned pedestrian street Arbat             visitors from 130 countries.))
Troparionton ((N.a. village n.a. 14-c. owner - a boyar            and a promenade on New ('Novyi') Arbat St. are situated               Sukharev's (Sq.) ((N.a. Sukharev tower (1695) built on Peter
diplomat nicknamed 'troparion'.))                                 here.))                                                               I's orders n.a. regiment that was headquartered here and
Blushham (N.a. village probably n.a. founder nicknamed            Smolensk (Sq. n.a. city) ((A former major market square n.a.          supported Peter during his sister Sofia's attempt to dethrone
'blush' or 'crimson'.)                                            tract to the city of Smolensk. Known from 17 c., rapidly              Peter when he was 7 y.o.))
Salarievton (N.a. village probably n.a. 14-c. owning merchant     developed when trade was moved to the city outskirts in 18            Turgenev (writer) ((19-c. writer, author of Fathers and Sons.
family. First mentioned in 16 c.)).                               c.))                                                                  One of the first free libraries n.a. him is also located here.))
                                                                  Kiev (railway station n.a. city) ((Kiev - a capital of Ukraine (ca.   China Town ((Contrary to the modern literal meaning of
2. GREEN                                                          3 mln). Trains from the station (1899) go to the south and            'Kitay' (China), historically the name of this one-time
Khovryton (district) ((N.a. village n.a. renowned family n.a.     south-west.))                                                         commerce district more likely owes to Tatar 'kitay' for
rich founder nicknamed 'khovra' (untidy). First mentioned in      Students (n.a. street) ((Students St. is home to a lot of             'middle' referring to a part of a city behind a second
16 c.))                                                           student dormitories (halls of residence).))                           defensive wall.))
River Station ((North River Terminal (1937) is one of the 2       Victory Park ((A memorial complex dedicated to the victory            Tretyakov (gallery) ((N.a. its founder Pavel Tretyakov, a 19-c.
river stations in Moscow and a part of Moskva-Volga channel       in the Great Patriotic War (Eastern front of WWII.)))                 businessman, patron of art, collector and philanthropist.))
infrastructure.))                                                 Slavic Bd. ((Nearby Slavic Bd. was named in honour of                 October (Sq.) ((A popular Soviet name commemorating
Water Stadium ((Formerly an aquatics centre built in 1935,        'fraternal Slavic nations' in 1966.))                                 October 1917 revolution. The square was formerly n.a.
currently a yacht club.))                                         Titby (village) ((Kuntsevo - literally 'titby'. Residents of the      Kaluga (city).))
Voykov (revolutionary), n.a. foundry. ((Rumour has it Voykov      village were avid birders according to the famous Dahl                Shabolovka (St.) ((Ancient street n.a. village and estate of
was involved in the royal family execution, which has led to      dictionary. A site of one the oldest settlements in the               Shashebaltsev family that had ceased to exist by the Time of
calls to rename the station since the '90s. In 2015 53% voted     territory of Moscow tracing back to 5 c.))                            Troubles (1598-1613).))
against renaming.))                                               Youth (n.a. street) ((Street in former Kuntsevo renamed in            Lenin Avenue ((Several modern streets and avenue sections
Falcon (Garden-city housing community). ((Garden city was a       1962 when the city became a part of Moscow.))                         were combined to form an avenue n.a. the leader of the
worldwide 20-c. movement in urban planning. The station           Wingedbury (district n.a. village) ((Former village dating back       1917 revolution in 1957.))
could not be n.a. All-Saints village where it was constructed     to 14 c., through most of its history belonged to the crown.))        Academic (n.a. district) ((N.a. drives across the territory
due to ideological reasons.))                                     Spearfishton (district n.a. village) ((Former village first           allotted for housing and institutes of the Academy of
Airport ((Former airport at the site of Aviapark Mall.))          mentioned in 16 c. Presumably n.a. founder nicknamed                  Sciences in 20 c.))
Dynamo (stadium) ((The home ground for Dynamo football            Spearfish.))                                                          Trade Unions (street) ((A Soviet-era name celebrating trade
club.))                                                           Rootcellarby (district n.a. village) ((Former village first           unions on their anniversary in 1958.))
Belarus (railway station n.a. country) ((The station was          mentioned in 18 c. presumably n.a. pits for storage of                New Bird Cherries (district) ((N.a. village n.a. wasteland and a
opened in 1870 as a main terminal of Moscow-Smolensk              vegetables.))                                                         gulley of the name Birdcherry in 16-17 c. A site of many
railway that went on to current Belarus. Trains to Poland,        Lama Portage (n.a. avenue n.a. town) ((N.a. portage from              Slavic burial mounds.))
Germany and France depart from this station.))                    Lama river to the confluents of Moskva River lying on the             Kaluga (avenue) ((N.a. Kaluga, a city of ca. 340,000 to the
Mayakovsky (poet) ((Renowned 20-c. avant-garde poet))             trade route from Novgorod. First mentioned in 12 c. The               south-west of Moscow. Center of a wealthy industrial
Tver (city) ((A city of 400,000 dating back to 11 c. A major      oldest city in Moscow region.))                                       region.))
Medieval Russia principality. Origin of name unknown, the         Mityaton (district n.a. village) ((First mentioned in 14 c.           Whiteby (district) ((N.a. village and wasteland first
old form ‘Tihveri’ corresponds to 'tihkua' seeping and 'veri'     'Mitya' is a short form of the popular name Dmitry.))                 mentioned in 17 c. A home of a notorious serial killer
blood (finn.) and similar Karelian hydronyms.))                   Friday Avenue (n.a. village) ((Formerly a part of a portage           noblewoman Saltychikha that was imprisoned for life in 1767
Theatres (n.a. square) ((Bolshoy (big) and Malyi (small)          route, in 17 c. the village became associated with the fairs on       for abusive treatment of serfs.))
theatres are situated on the Teatralnaya square.))                the day of 'Paraskeva Pyatnitsa', a saint and a personification       Littlehorseby (district) ((N.a. village and wasteland, name
New Smiths ((A sloboda (a semi-autonomous settlement)             of Friday ('pyatnitsa') that took in qualities of former pagan        origin unknown. Slavic settlements from 12 c.))
first mentioned in 1625.))                                        deities.))                                                            Warm Camp (district) ((N.a. villages with inns set up in 17 c.
Pavelets (railway station n.a. town) ((A town in Ryazan                                                                                 in wastelands around the tract to Kaluga.))
region n.a. either diminutive of 'Pavel' (Paul) or a dialectism   4. LIGHT-BLUE                                                         Ashby (district) ((N.a. village first mentioned in 14 c. as
for 'spider'.))                                                   Alexander Gardens (n.a. Alexander I) ((One of the first urban         Moscow prince Ivan Kalita's land. A historic estate of the
Car Plant ((AMO ZiL – the Moscow Automotive Society –             public parks in Moscow (1812).))                                      same name is situated here.))
Likhachov Plant. Founded in 1916 in connection with a state       Suburbs (arab.) (see line Blue, 3)                                    New Ashtrees (avenue) ((N.a. same 'Yasenevo' (’Ashby’)
procurement contract. Known for production of lorries             Smolensk (Sq. n.a. city) (see line Blue, 3)                           village.))
(trucks).))                                                       Kiev (railway station n.a. city) (see line Blue, 3)
Technology Park ((Nagatino i-Land, a major urban                  Trade fairs ((N.a. nearby Expocentre, a major center for              Bitza Park ((N.a. nearby Bitza Forest conservation area n.a.
development project of the Moscow government.))                   trade shows.))                                                        river which name most likely derived from a word for
Kolomenskoye (n.a. estate, museum and park) ((The                 International ((Project name of the station had been                  ‘runaround river flow’. Infamous as a site of a serial killer
Kolomenskoye estate was situated on the path to the town          'Moscow City' after the major business district it’s located          Pichushkin's activity in 2000s.))
of Kolomna, Moscow region))                                       in.))                                                                 Urban Forest ((N.a. nearby Bitza Park and Butovo Urban
Forest.))                                                         Peter's palace created by Catherine II. The palace imitated        the nearby street renamed in his honour in 1954.))
Oldswinging St. ((N.a. village which name derives from either     Turkish style due to the foreign politics of the time.))           Pipe (n.a. Sq.) ((The square's name is related to Neglinnaya
'swing' or 'pump', first mentioned in 17 c.))                     CSKA (sports club) ((CSKA - Central Sport Club of the Army         river, which was put into a 'pipe' (tunnel) in 19 c.))
Skobelev St. (general) ((Famous military commander known          (1911). During the Soviet era the club became a part of the        Presentation of Jesus Bd. ((N.a. nearby monastery founded
for the campaigns in Central Asia, Russo-Turkish war of           Armed Forces sports society and still is run by the Ministry of    in 1397 in honour of victory over Timur, a Turco-Mongol
1877-78 and liberation of Bulgaria.))                             Defense. One of the oldest in Russia.)).                           invader. Functioning.))
Admiral Ushakov Bd. ((The celebrated naval commander of           Fineby (avenue) ((N.a. village first mentioned in 1572.            Chkalov (pilot) ((N.a. St. (of the same name at the design
18 c. that had 43 victories and 0 defeats.))                      Moscow princes estate since at least 14 c. The first stud farm     stage) n.a. a Soviet test pilot that took a pioneering flight
Gorchakov St. (diplomat) ((Famous 19-c. diplomat and              in Russia was established here by Ivan III.))                      over the North Pole (8811 km/5475mi) from Moscow to
statesman, a foreign policy minister under Alexander II.))        Shelepton (n.a. village) ((N.a. certain Shelepa (informal          Vancouver.))
Bunin Alley (writer) ((20-c. writer and poet, winner of Noble     personal name). Village known from 15 c.))                         Roman ((A stylistically 'experimental' station paying homage
Prize in 1933.))                                                  Victory Park (see line Blue, 3)                                    to the city of Rome. Features a fountain.))
                                                                  Minsk (city) ((N.a. Minsk, a 2.65-m. capital of Belarus, due to    Peasants' Gateway (Sq.) ((Renamed in 1919. Formerly the Sq.
7. PURPLE                                                         its location in the city's west.))                                 of Saviour (Transfiguration) Gateway.))
Glider (street) ((Constructed on the site of a former polar       Lomonosov Avenue (scientist) ((An 18-c. polymath (homo             Oak Forest (district) ((N.a. village known from 14 c. n.a. oak
airfield, n.a. glider pilots of the Central aero club.))          universalis): scientist, writer. Among his discoveries is the      woods. A common toponym in Central Russia.))
Getoff (n.a. city) ((N.a. town in Moscow region n.a. river        law of conservation of mass in chemical reactions.))               Leathermantle (district) ((N.a. St. n.a. village n.a. someone
which name, taking varied forms of 'get off sth' (for ships or    Ramenki (district) ((N.a. river n.a. an archaic word meaning 'a    nicknamed Kozhukh ('leather mantle'). A clerk of this name is
people on board), presumably related to portage routes            deep, dense forest'.))                                             mentioned in records in 1489.))
from Novgorod.))                                                                                                                     Print workers (district) ((Contrary to the modern literal
Bulkton (n.a. district) ((N.a. village n.a. owner - a boyar       9. GREY                                                            meaning, thought to be n.a. village n.a. certain 16-c.
nicknamed Bulk in 15 c.))                                         Altufievton ((N.a. village most likely n.a. certain Altufievs      serviceman Pechatnikov.))
Spartacus (stadium) ((Station was opened together with the        that used to own it. First mentioned in 1585.))                    Volga (Bd., river) ((N.a. the river because of its south-eastern
home stadium of 'Spartak' FC in 2014.))                           Beaverton ((Village (16 c.) name origin uncertain, probably        location. Volga is the longest and one of the largest rivers in
Piketon (n.a. district) ((N.a. village n.a. owner - a man         n.a. ancestor nicknamed 'Biber' (old form for ‘beaver').))         Europe. The name derives from Proto-Slav. 'wetness'.))
nicknamed Pike (the name features in Novgorod birchbark           Joyful ((Bedroom suburb n.a. collective farm that had              Fondly loved (district) ((N.a. village that received this name
manuscripts). First mentioned in 1441-42.))                       occupied the area and belonged to the Timiryazev                   in 18 c., apparently due to fashion for all things pastoral.))
October Field ((N.a. field formerly known as 'Military' and       agricultural academy.))                                            Bratislava (St, city) ((N.a. the capital of Slovakia 'in honour of
renamed in 1922 in honour of October Revolution.))                Reverend's (village) ((Village formerly known as Benjamin's        Russo-Slovak friendship'.))
Polezhaev (n.a. engineer) ((Soviet engineer, builder in           belonging to a royal family branch received its current name       Mary's (district) ((N.a. village presumably n.a. its founder
Moscow Metro Construction and later its CEO.))                    when its last owner died heirless in 17 c. and the land passed     Maria, the mother of Ivan III. First Slavic settlements date to
Horseracing ((N.a. railway platform n.a. Moscow                   to the patriarch Nikon.))                                          12 c.))
Hippodrome (1834).))                                              Peter-Sensible's (village) ((A former estate bought by the         Boriston (n.a. village) ((Probably populated from 12 c.
1905 St. ((Renamed in 1931 to commemorate the 1905                government in 19 c. to accommodate the Timiryazev                  Renamed after Boris Godunov, a member of the royal family,
workers uprising, the main events of which unfolded in the        agricultural academy. Currently a conservation area.))             when it was granted to him for the victory over a Crimean
vicinity.))                                                       Timiryazev (scientist) ((Agricultural academy n.a. Timiryazev,     khan.))
Barricades (street) ((Renamed in 1919 to commemorate              a renowned plant physiologist, occupies a large part of the        Shipilovo (n.a. St) ((N.a. village, name origin unknown. Might
street clashes with the state and barricades set up by            district of the same name.))                                       be related to 'to hiss'. First mentioned in 16 c, Slavic
workers during the uprising of 1905.))                            Dmitrov (city, avenue) ((The avenue is a former tract to the       settlements from 12 c.))
Pushkin (poet) ((A major 19-c. poet and writer considered to      city of Dmitrov founded in 12 c. by Yuri Dolgorukiy and n.a.       Chaffinchby (district) ((N.a. village first mentioned in 17 c
be the founder of modern Russian literary language.))             his newborn son.))                                                 which name most likely derives from a chaffinch bird.))
Smiths Bridge (street) ((N.a. a bridge over river Neglinnaya      Savyolovo (railway station n.a. terminal station) ((N.a. male
that was later put into a tunnel. The bridge was n.a. smiths      name Saveliy, origin unknown.))                                    11. 2nd RING
sloboda (a semi-autonomous settlement).))                         Mendeleev (chemist) ((A nearby university is n.a. famous 19-       Peter's Park (see line Yellow, 8)
China Town ((Contrary to the modern literal meaning of            c. scientist and inventor that formulated the Periodic Law.))      CSKA (sports club) (see line Yellow, 8)
'Kitay' (China), historically the name of this one-time           Coloured Bd. ((N.a. flower market in 19 c.))                       Fineby (avenue) (see line Yellow, 8)
commerce district more likely owes to Tatar 'kitay' for           Chekhov (writer) ((19 c. writer and playwright, author of The      Shelepton (n.a. village) (see line Yellow, 8)
'middle', because it refers to a part of a city behind a second   Seagull, Three Sisters, The Cherry Orchard, short stories.))       Business Center ((The ‘Moscow City’ business district
defensive wall.))                                                 Pine Wood (Kremlin tower) ((The tower's name derives from          featuring skyscrapers.))
Trivet ((N.a. 16-c. gate n.a. sloboda (a semi-autonomous          an ancient pine wood that covered one of the 7 hills of
settlement) of trivet manufacturers.))                            Moscow.))                                                          11A. SEAWAVE BLUE
Proletarian ((N.a. former district renamed by the Soviets in      Small Lawn (streets) ((Contrary to the contemporary                Kashira (see line Green, 2)
1929 from Mat (see also Ilyich Sq. (line 8). Workers of the       meaning of the word 'polyanka' (little glade or lawn) , the        Warsaw (avenue) ((The 19-c. avenue n.a. Warsaw, a 1.7-m.
district took active part in the revolution.))                    street received its name from the ‘fields’ from the edges of       capital of Poland, most likely because it went over the old
Volgograd Avenue (city) ((Renamed in 1964 after the city in       which it ran in 18 c.))                                            tract that turned west to Poland.))
the South (also known as Stalingrad, renamed in 1962 "in          Serpukhov (city) ((Currently a town of 125,000, dates back to      Kakhov (St.) ((N.a. village in Ukraine where Red Army
response to public demand"). Formerly Oak Ridge,                  14 c. As many other settlements to the south of Moscow,            stopped the advance of Vrangel's White Army in 1920.))
Breakoffe, Eustace avenue.))                                      served as a fortress in the times of Mongol invasion.))
Textile workers (district) ((N.a. former town of textile          Tula (city) ((A city to the south of Moscow (ca. 500,000). A       12. LIGHTEST BLUE
workers that developed by 1930s on the site of nearby             major ironworks center in imperial times. First mentioned in       See line Orange, 6.
textile-related factories existing from 19 c.))                   12 c.))
Cosmostead (district) ((N.a. estate n.a. area n.a. mill that      Nagatino (village) ((Former village first mentioned in 14 c.,      (13. MONORAIL)
belonged to a certain Cosmos (surname: 'of Cosmo') in 16-17       name origin unknown.))
c. Settlements in the area date back to 13 c.)                    Nakhimov Ave. (admiral) ((A famous Crimean War admiral, a          14. PINK (MOSCOW CENTRAL RING / MOSCOW LITTLE RING
Ryazan Avenue (city) ((A city to the south-east of Moscow,        commander during the Siege of Sevastopol (lost) and in the         RAILWAY)
ca. 540,000. Settlements from paleolithic times, Slavic city in   Battle of Sinop naval victory over the Ottomans.))                 Panfilov (n.a. street) ((A general known for his command
6-8 c., modern city founded in 1095.))                            Sevastopol (city, avenue ((A city in Crimea of ca. 435,000         during the defense of Moscow at WWII.))
Vykhino (district) ((N.a. village that emerged in 16 c. Name      founded in 1783 by Catherine II's edict. Ancient settlements       Streshnevo ((N.a. village n.a. noble Streshnev family of 16-19
origin unknown.))                                                 in the territory of current Sevastopol date back to 6 BC.))        c. Last name origin unknown, most likely Russian.))
Lermontov Avenue (poet) ((A 19-c. poet considerd to be the        Chertanovo (village) ((Origin uncertain, may be from Great         Baltic ((N.a. Baltic St. due to the controversy surrounding
most important after Pushkin, a main figure in Russian            Abatis Line (chain of fortifications from Tatar raids).))          Voykov after whom the district was named in Soviet time
Romanticism.))                                                    Southern                                                           (see Voykovskaya, line 2).))
Swindleton (district) ((N.a. village dating back to 1499 n.a. a   Prague (city) ((The station was built with participation of        Sooton ((N.a. wasteland and, earlier, village n.a. either
boyar nicknamed Swindler or Cheater (archaic form).))             Czech architects and engineers.))                                  Koptev family or a 15-c. boyar nicknamed 'Kopot' (soot). First
Boilermakers (town) ((N.a. village, name origin unknown.          Academician Yangel St. (engineer) ((A Soviet scientist and         mentioned in 16 c.))
First mentioned in 17 c.))                                        missile designer.))                                                Wicked Pine Woods (see Upper Wicked Pine Woods, line 10)
                                                                  Ann's (village) ((Former village known from 19 c. n.a. certain     Circumferential
8. YELLOW                                                         Ann: the patron Saint Ann or Princess Ann (wife of the             Reverend's (see line Grey, 9)
New Mowing ((N.a. village first mentioned in 1401 near the        founder)).)                                                        Botanical garden ((Moscow Botanical Garden of Academy of
lakes of the same name; origin unknown, might be from             Dmitry Donskoy Bd. (prince) ((Moscow 14-c. prince Dmitry           Sciences, 3.61 km2, founded in 1945.))
'kosa', a scythe.))                                               Donskoy is known for being the first to challenge Tatars and       Forkby (district) ((N.a. village that sat on two rivers, Yauza
New Weights ((N.a. village known from 16 c., name origin          for defeating them in the Battle of Kulikovo.))                    and its trbutary Goryainka, forming a fork.))
unknown, might be from 'girya', weight piece.))                                                                                      Whitestone ((Descriptive name for a station that was
Featherby (district) ((N.a. city, former village and wasteland    10. SALAD GREEN                                                    constructed (1908) in the territory of a Moose Island
known from 14 c. The name likely reflects on history of           Seliger (lake) ((N.a. war efforts during the Battle of Moscow      national park.))
hunting activity in the area, like other nearby toponyms:         (WWII) by Lake Seliger – name origin is uncertain, partly          Rokossovsky Bd. (see line Red, 1)
Black Grouse Keepers, Honey-hunting.))                            from finn. 'jarvi' (lake).))                                       Locomotive (stadium) ((N.a. football club of the Moscow-
Enthusiasts Avenue ((In 1919 renamed after revolutionaries        Upper Wicked Pine Woods ((N.a. villages and river most             Kazan railway team founded in 1922, one of the oldest in
and political prisoners that were sent to Siberia by this         likely n.a. woods (literally 'dangerous pine woods') where         Russia.))
road.))                                                           bandits dwelled on the route to Dmitrov.))                         Izmaelovo (park, avenue) ((N.a. village known from 1389 and
Aircraft Engines ((N.a. The Central Institute of Aviation         Fonvizin (St, writer) ((N.a. 18-c. playwright and statesman,       later as a royal estate, origin uncertain.))
Motor Development (1930).))                                       author of satirical comedies.))                                    Falcon mountain (district) ((N.a. hawking facilities of the 17-
Ilyich Sq. ((Former name of a nearby Sq. referring to Vladimir    Butyr (n.a. district) ((N.a. village n.a. an archaic word for 'a   c. tsar Alexis, an avid hunter.))
Ilyich Lenin. Currently Mat Gateway Sq. (historic name).))        settlement separated from a city by a forest or a field'. First    Enthusiasts Avenue ((In 1919 renamed after revolutionaries
Marxist (n.a. street) ((In 1919 a former 'Empty' St. was          mentioned in 14 c.))                                               and political prisoners that were sent to Siberia by this
renamed as 'marxist' according to the spirit of the times.))      Mary's Grove (district) ((N.a. either Maria's sloboda (a semi-     road.))
Tretyakov (gallery) ((See line Orange, 6.))                       autonomous settlement) or a female gang leader (up to 18 c.        Andronton ((N.a. village n.a. some Andron (a variation of
                                                                  the area was part of the woods where bandits dwelled).))           Andrew).))
Peter's Park ((Landscape park founded in 19 c. behind the         Dostoevsky (St, writer) ((A famous 19-c. writer who lived on       Nizhny Novgorod (St, city) ((N.a. a railway station n.a. big city
to the east of Moscow (ca. 1,265,000).))                       EXPLANATION OF APPROACH:                                            not even why it was named so. This is why I mention what is
New Forelockton (St) ((N.a. village n.a. man nicknamed         This map is for entertainment and serves as an interesting          most peculiar about that Semyonov neighbourhood in the
Forelock. First mentioned in 17 c.))                           perspective on the historic context of the city. However, it        description, but not in the name. It’s also not Semyon(‘s)
Ugresha (St) ((N.a. Ugresha monastery, located on the route    can be grounds for further research by the reader when he is        because all of the names above refer to Semyonov, not
to it. The monastery's name derives from the founder Dmitry    interested in anything particular.                                  Semyon, otherwise the village would have been called
Donskoy's legendary quote about his 'heart warming' pious      Basically, in my translation of the name of a station I am          ‘Semyonovo’. And I did not choose an immediate translation
dream he had there.))                                          guided by the word that gave such station its name, whether         such as ‘Simon’s’, too, because this is jumping over history,
ZIL (plant) (see line Green, 2 – Car Plant)                    it’s a place, a person, event, etc. I do not refer to the origins   and when translating the stations names I was trying to
Upper Cauldrons (village) ((First mentioned in 14 c. being a   of such place or person or their names. They are often              focus on unraveling the names layer by layer, so to speak. In
frequent transfer point and place of meeting of visitors of    covered in the explanatory section where I go a little beyond       this case no one cares about Simon (Semyon), because there
the capital.))                                                 the surface.                                                        is more immediate importance of things that got their name
Crimean ((N.a. St and bridge n.a. a court where Crimean        I should also note that this is not a history book and I try to     from the village (?) that was named after his supposed
khan's embassies often stayed in 17-18 c.))                    stick to my ‘name-explaining’ approach in the descriptions so       descendant Semyonov. They are all Semyonov’s:
Gagarin Sq. (cosmonaut) ((Famous Soviet cosmonaut, the         I just say a few words about who or what was important              settlement/sloboda, estate, regiment, square, streets.
first human in outer space.))                                  enough to give the station its name, and if it’s something          Actually, we don’t even know why Semyonov estate was
Meadow workers ((N.a. vast fields near the river and nearby    random, such as a village that happened to be situated in the       called like this, so we should not talk about ancestors at all.
slobodas of people who worked them. The stadium of the         area, I focus on its name origin, in a manner similar to that       This means the translation that deep is impossible. Example
same name (Luzhniki) is located here.))                        employed in respect of the names of the stations                    3: Kuzminki. In this case it’s just name->surname-
Kutuzov (avenue) (see line Light-Blue, 4)                      themselves. After all, in case of villages (districts) their        >village=station. So, the station’s name is the same as the
Business Center (see line 2nd Ring, 11)                        names are identical to the names of the stations, so there is       village’s and we get to do name origin research. At least
                       nd
Shelepton (see line 2 Ring, 11)                                nothing meaningful I can do but translate the name of the           there is nothing left behind in an era midway from antiquity
                    nd
Fineby (see line 2 Ring, 11)                                   village (district) itself.                                          to modern times, as Semyonov objects would be in the
Polezhaev (see line Purple, 7)                                                                                                     example 2 if they gave way to obscure and unfounded
Sorge (St) ((N.a. a Soviet spy Zorge (Sorge in English) that   Examples: in case of, say, Chekhov, I write about him, not of       Semyon.
worked in Nazi Germany and in the Empire of Japan and          his name origin, because he himself gave a place (a station)
tried to warn the USSR of the imminent invasion by Hitler.))   the name. In case of Semyonov (Sq.), if you look at the             So, these are the general principles. Of course, there’s such a
                                                               history of the station, its name happens to refer to the            variety of names on the map that sometimes I deviate a bit,
                                                               square, not to the village, sloboda, regiment or anything else      because the rules cannot be well applicable to everything. I
                                                               related to this square. The fact is they all share a history:       still tried to stay close to the concept and hopefully I’ll be
                                                               some nearby Semyonov tsar’s estate gave name to the                 revising it, so, enjoy and comment.
                                                               famous Peter’s regiment that gave name to the settlement
                                                               that gave name to the square, but why this estate was called
                                                               ‘Semyonov’s’ is actually unknown. So if you plainly look at
                                                               the name, even if you know the history, it is just Semyonov
                                                               (not Semyonov’s because there is no tradition of making
                                                               relative adjectives in English language, especially possessive,
                                                               for names of streets, stations, etc. and I tried to stay away
                                                               from it). I could name the station Semyonov regiment, or
                                                               Semyonov sloboda, but then it would not be the name of the
                                                               station and, unfortunately,

I graduated from school number 1253, graduated with honors.
Our school is located at the Park Kultury metro station, merging with the main exit from the station into a single whole. If you exit the lobby to the Crimean Bridge and go around the lobby to the left, you will enter the courtyard, where my school, in fact, is located. You can somehow get out of the subway and see to make sure that I am not deceiving you. You can ask about our director, Lev Sergeyevich Podemny, he remembers me. Give him my regards.
In the center of our school playground is the underground ventilation shaft. The backs of the school are smoothly moving to the Park Kultury station, and you do not understand where the school ends and where the metro station begins. And this is not so surprising, because our school was preparing personnel for the metro, and the subway was our enterprise-chief.
My whole childhood was saturated with the metro, and until the tenth grade, when I, having had a hard time getting sick with scarlet fever, began to suffer with acute claustrophobia, I was firmly sure that I would drive trains through the dark tunnels of the Moscow metro, looking at the serpent silver rails ahead, knowing exactly when the coal the darkness will be broken by the splendor of the shining station, and even knew that my line would be Ring. You just listen to this name - Ring line. All other lines can be called "branch", and she, the only - no. Only "line". The ring has always captivated me with the fact that it has no end, no beginning - O. I remember that in junior classes I could endlessly long (well, not infinitely, but only until the teacher noticed this) look at the metro map that hung in our school in every classroom above the blackboard, next to the portrait of Lenin, whose name our metro carries is exactly so, at least, then I interpreted the reason for its presence there; to look at her and imagine the crazy drivers of the Koltsevaya line, who are winding up circles in an endless ring: their eyes stopped, the hair on their foreheads stuck together with sweat, their hands joined the levers: right - gas, left - brake, in our school even the first-grader knows, After all, this is one of the mandatory questions in the entrance exam, along with the knowledge of the names of all metro stations.
In general, our school was thoroughly imbued with the spirit of the subway; the usual, normal, acceptable was only that which directly related to him, the metro. Other non-metro-related phenomena were described in school circles by the epithet “external”. The school, and the underground, into which it smoothly flowed, surrounded, thus, the "outside" world.
Our school was not like the rest. All ordinary objects had specificity: they secretly prepared us for life underground, for service to the subway. At the mathematics lessons, we calculated how much time it would take to go from “Yuzhnaya” station to “University”, how many people were transported around the ring in a clockwise direction and how many - against. I still remember one witty task: Masha Larina sits on the Sportivnaya, entering the station from the center and travels to the South-West, and Petya Filimonov sits on the Bolshevik Library. Lenin ", going to her from" Borovitskaya ", i.e. from the opposite side, and goes to the "University". Do they have a chance to meet in the subway, fall in love at first sight, get married and have three children, if the length of the stations "Sportivnaya" and "Library them. Lenin "is 200 m, Masha walks at a speed of 3 km / h, Peter - 3.5 km / h, and subway trains come every fifteen minutes? All dictations, all statements - only on the subway topics. "Children of the Maze", "Black Chicken" - in the mandatory program. In physics lessons, we solved problems about the movement of a train, the work of raising passengers with an escalator, about the resistance of wires. The device of the electric motor is a very important topic. Geology has considered the problems of laying tunnels and methods of dealing with groundwater and debris. The history of the underground business has been studied since the third grade. Geology has considered the problems of laying tunnels and methods of dealing with groundwater and debris. The history of the underground business has been studied since the third grade. Geology has considered the problems of laying tunnels and methods of dealing with groundwater and debris. The history of the underground business has been studied since the third grade.
As I already said, it was difficult to understand where the school ends, and where the station starts, and even to understand where the station ends - it was even more difficult. This is for you, people far from the metro, people of the surface, the metro station is a sharply defined volume. In fact, everything is not so: around this volume, the “external station”, as we say, the earth is shed by various outbuildings for many hundreds of meters. From our school it was possible to freely get (through the basement, for example) into this network. How funny it was, coming out of a door unevenly painted with olive paint and meaningless for passengers passing by the continuous flow of passengers Shch-587 to the lobby of the Park of Culture, go down along the escalator with them to the trains, feeling like a carrier of secret knowledge.
My closest school friend was a guy with a strange name, Blaise Pascal. From where it came from, he really could not explain, and he (and I, incidentally, too) learned about his great namesake only in the tenth grade, in the lesson of the history of underground business, and was inexpressibly surprised by this. Blaise was from a metro family, as we were told: his father drove trains along the Sokolnichesky line, his mother sold tokens at River Station. However, in our school most of the children were from such families. Many, but not me - I was an orphan, they took me to school for upbringing from an orphanage. The fact is that our school combined in itself a boarding school with a regular school, and when they, family children, left school after class for a home dinner, a caress for mothers, their own room, toys, friends, we, the boarding school, looked with gloomy envy on them, leaving, through the windows of our school,
Blaise was not tall, dense. His green eyes looked piercingly, and somewhere in their depths ice gleamed, which did not melt even in the hottest summer. Blaise did not have an index finger on his right hand — in the third grade, he was completely cut off by an electrofuncer in the classroom. I remember, Blaise then looked surprised at his severed finger, shook it in a handkerchief and quickly, without saying goodbye to anyone, left the classroom, dropping scarlet drops. Returning to the classroom in half an hour, he said loudly, to no one specifically addressing: “buried!” And fainted. Blood loss. Recovering in the ambulance, he could not remember where his finger was buried. So now no one knows where Blaise’s index finger is now with his right hand.
Therefore, Blaise's full name at school was Blaise-not-know-where-the-finger, or, in short, just a Finger. Studied Finger secondary, however, in vocational training - Finger, too, like me, wanted to become a train driver - was one of the best students in the school. In the fifth grade, he was already able to drive through the Ring blind: he not only knew the distance between stations by the memory - for so many minutes at such a speed, it was not very difficult - but he remembered the whole texture of the tunnels - where up, where down, where to the left where to the right - and remembered her in such a way that he could only be guided by the sensations of his vestibular apparatus, by the slightest acceleration, in absolute darkness - and this was already an unconditional talent. Finger's icy eyes seemed to be seen in absolute darkness, or, more precisely, they knew. A similar talent for orientation appeared at the Finger just after the injury,
My favorite subject at school was the history of underground work, and my favorite teacher was Sergey Andreevich Krot, who read it. Sergey Andreevich was tall, slouching, pulling down a tidy goatee, which he had a habit of taking into his fist and pulling it when he was thinking about something. His eyes looked at the world through the light glass of an old-fashioned pince-nez, and he smoked a small, just tiny, pipe.
“Well, colleagues, let's get started,” he said, quickly entering the class and opening the magazine, “what are we on the agenda today?” His adjective was “deep”, and he used it in his speech on occasion and without cause .
Sergey Andreevich suffered from a nervous breakdown rather widespread among metro workers - agoraphobia, fear of open spaces. Open space, the sky caused him panic. There was nothing more intolerable, in his opinion, than a flight. I am afraid that if he was on the plane, his heart would have stopped exactly at that moment when the chassis would have left the ground. In this regard, the metro allocated to him a personal two-room apartment directly at the Park Kultury station, and in the class of history of the underground business there were no windows.
Sergey Andreevich was not just a teacher, he was more. He sculpted young souls like a sculptor. His unofficial role in the school was to direct the most talented - and therefore least controlled, most exposed to the temptations of the outside world - students under the ground, or, as it was called in the teacher's jargon, "deepen".
One day, stopping me after his lesson, he invited me to visit. “Come to two today,” he said, “by two nights.” I agreed, of course - it was a great honor. When I arrived, the teacher was already waiting for me, sitting on a bench next to his door. He smoked thoughtfully, blowing small neat rings of smoke. Next to him on the bench was a cup of coffee on a saucer.
"Sit down," he invited me. I sat down. Sergey Andreevich released another neat little ring of smoke. There was a cozy twilight at the station - minimal illumination burned - the rails gleamed dimly, snaking, going both ways to the coal blackness of the tunnels, there was silence unusual for the metro. “You want to drive trains, right?” He asked, and I nodded affirmatively. “Are you going to devote your life to this?” He asked, and I nodded again. “And do you know what it means to dedicate life to the metro? All my life, to the last drop of it? Are you strong enough, decisive? After all, you still do not really know what it is, for 14 hours a day to drive your train along the same route, you have not yet seen the face of a person stepping under your wheels, closing his eyes, as if jumping into cold black water, as a soldier going into oblivion, did not hear that sound what happens when the body is hit by a train ... And I saw it all, because before I got to our school, I also drove trains on the Ring Road. I still remember all the turns, all descents and ascents. ” The teacher released another smoke ring and thought about something, looking at the lamp that was fully filled up.
“Well,” he said, after thinking a little, “apparently, you firmly decided to become a real metroman. Then it's time to tell you a secret. Just remember, who recognized her there is no way back to the outside world. Are you ready? There is still a chance to turn back. " Teacher looked deep into my eyes. To be honest, I was scared, but - apparently, I was too young, and probably the teacher, talking to me so well knew what he was doing, it was no wonder that his role in the school was to “dig in” talented students, he was a good psychologist - and I exhaled: "I am ready." “Well, you took this step ... Then listen and remember, they will never tell you this again,” said the teacher, pulling on a pipe and releasing a smoke ring, “Do you think that the main role of the metro is to transport passengers?” Far from it. Tell me why all this is the magnificence of stations, all the insane complexity of the System. Have you already noticed that the subway is constantly talking to you? Well, then know - our Moscow metro is a huge repeater of encrypted information. The train schedule, carriage inscriptions, advertisements, the procedure for repairing escalators, suddenly passing trains without stopping, empty trains are all messages. Six cars, each with a number, read them - here you have a whole cipher text ...
With the help of these messages, the coordination of actions of various organizations is carried out, it is still too early for you to know which ones. The headquarters of these organizations are also located in the metro. You have noticed that in some cars on glass, which would be frontal if the pasture were a locomotive, there is a red, stencilled inscription - “NEEDLE”. Thought what it is? Not? This is one of the ciphers ... Yes, just sitting at the station and reading the intervals of incoming trains, you can learn a lot! If you know the cipher, of course.
So, my boy, when you take the train, know that the accuracy of the secret message means the accuracy of the schedule you perform. You make a mistake for two minutes - and it is not known what will happen: maybe people will die, maybe even a war will begin. On your shoulders will be the fate of the world, boy. Remember this. The teacher stopped talking and looked at his palms for a long time, as if trying to read in the pattern of their lines not only his future, but mine, and of all mankind.
Then he abruptly stood up and turned to me, a tender smile played on his face. “Now it's time for you to go, it's too late, you have been waiting for a long time at school,” he said.
The teacher shook my hand, smiled good-bye again and, creaking the door, disappeared into his apartment. I was left alone in the twilight station. After standing a bit, I slowly went to the escalator, to rise to the surface. And I realized then that my life would pass here, under the ground, in a world of absolute calm, in the eternal undermining of the outside world, and when I die, they will bury me in one of the underground cemeteries, where they usually bury distinguished metro workers. These cemeteries are located exactly under the external ones - they only bury them much deeper. So, there is Novodevichy, there is Preobrazhenskoye, there is Vagankovsky; I always wanted to be after death on Novodevichy.
Novodevichy is one of the oldest and largest, founded when they were still able to build. Most of all it looks like Mayakovskaya station, only, naturally, without paths, and the entrance to the hall without escalators is just a small arch. Since building large areas underground is not something that is outside, each cubic meter is a huge cost, moreover, according to secret statistics of the metrostat, for every 100 cubic meters of volume one metro-construction life has to be saved, you have to save. Therefore, in underground cemeteries they bury them vertically, with their feet down. A fresh grave, therefore, is a hole in the floor, 2.5 meters deep and 60 centimeters in diameter. So they are rotting, honored workers of the metro - stretched out in front, at attention, and saluting after death. As drowned in the seaweed drowned at the bottom of the Moscow River. The graves in these cemeteries, due to the technological complexity of their digging, they are excavated in advance, and the new cemetery looks more like empty honeycombs waiting for honey and larvae. "Nulevka" - that is, an empty grave - each metro-builder receives upon retirement, and was obliged from that moment to monitor and care for her. Since the cemeteries are set up in places with good, dense, dry soil, the owners of the “nuliovok” use them, before they are used for their intended purpose, as cellars for storing various agricultural products from their own vegetable garden in winter. When a grave is settled, everything stored inside it is taken out, and the client, on the contrary, is placed inside. Such is the exchange. "Nulevka" - that is, an empty grave - each metro-builder receives upon retirement, and was obliged from that moment to monitor and care for her. Since the cemeteries are set up in places with good, dense, dry soil, the owners of the “nuliovok” use them, before they are used for their intended purpose, as cellars for storing various agricultural products from their own vegetable garden in winter. When a grave is settled, everything stored inside it is taken out, and the client, on the contrary, is placed inside. Such is the exchange. "Nulevka" - that is, an empty grave - each metro-builder receives upon retirement, and was obliged from that moment to monitor and care for her. Since the cemeteries are set up in places with good, dense, dry soil, the owners of the “nuliovok” use them, before they are used for their intended purpose, as cellars for storing various agricultural products from their own vegetable garden in winter. When a grave is settled, everything stored inside it is taken out, and the client, on the contrary, is placed inside. Such is the exchange. When a grave is settled, everything stored inside it is taken out, and the client, on the contrary, is placed inside. Such is the exchange. When a grave is settled, everything stored inside it is taken out, and the client, on the contrary, is placed inside. Such is the exchange.
I took one last look at the empty semi-dark station, turned on the silent escalator, and drove up in the gloom. Billboards blindly sailed past. The twilight station smoothly flowed into the twilight of the school; my boisterous steps in the empty dark corridors of the school sounded no less surprising than at the station. When I finally got to my room, already lying in my own bed, in the dark, shining with open eyes in the moonlight, I thought for a long time over the teacher's words, and then fell asleep to myself. I was absolutely happy, and I dreamed that I was driving my train along the Koltsevaya Line on schedule, proud of the fact that everything around me — the train, the tunnels, the stations, and the passengers — the whole mechanism works precisely and smoothly, clearly passing the necessary information. I felt a great love for all these invisible people, who in the guise of ordinary passengers read hidden messages, analyze information, make decisions. I felt like a cog, but a necessary cog in a very complex machine that decides the fate of the world. I tried to recognize these secret agents, peering into the faces of the people standing at the stations, and, as it seemed to me, I recognized them for sure, and smiled at them.
But suddenly there was a tragic event that destroyed my whole life, and all my childhood dreams were ruined.
Once, it was the beginning of April, we were studying in the tenth grade then. A finger at dinner told me that he had a girl from outside, and that he was very much incapable of associating her life with the metro. “You see,” said Finger, deftly wielding a fork clamped in a four-fingered hand, “I tell her, let me arrange you on duty on an escalator — and she laughs. This is boring, he says, and pay a pittance. She does not understand ... ". The finger shook his head. It should be noted that at that time I was considered at school a master of words, and could, it was believed, convince anyone of anything. The glory of the metrophysics of the underground, the philosopher of the dungeon, went to school about me, and it was perfectly clear what Finger wanted - so that I would influence his girlfriend. I suggested to Blaise three of us to go on Sunday at the Central Park of Culture and Culture, and he happily agreed.
Finger has hope.
On Sunday, I came to the main entrance to the Gorky Park at precisely 9 am, and naturally, I did not find anyone there. It rained at night, and - finally! - it smelled in spring. Prior to this, the greens that had turned out were sterile, it seemed to be green only for themselves, each leaf separately. Now everything was permeated with a common space of smells, everything merged in a general rush upwards. On the black asphalt under the trees, the earrings turned green in the mud, the same earrings, like the furry caterpillars, hung on the branches. I waited for the Finger with his girlfriend, and the morning sun gradually came into its own, and in its light it gleamed with the glass of the Central House of Artists.
Finally they appeared.
They were walking along the Crimean Bridge — I recognized the squat figure of Blaise from afar — holding hands. Slow barges sailed beneath them, laden with yellow sand — one, second, third — and they stopped, leaning over the railing, to watch the barges disappear under the bridge. I waved to them and went to meet. Blaise noticed me and waved his hand in response.
The girl - “Lena”, - she introduced herself, stretching out her hand under an incomprehensible angle, whether for a shake, or for a kiss - there were slightly slanting gooseberry-green eyes that looked when she spoke to her interlocutor somewhere on the earlobe ( at first it was a little unnerving), heavy braid to the waist and fragile hands of nervous hands with surprisingly round pink nails.
We three together went to the park.
Lena suggested riding a roller coaster: “You love trains!” And Finger and I agreed. After standing in line, we began to occupy seats in the filed train. I, due to natural arrogance, sat first, and it turned out that there were only two places left in the whole train - next to me and one more, in the other trailer. I got up, but Finger waved his hands, and Lena sat next to me, and Blaise separately, in front. “Are you afraid?” She asked. I answered no. "Then I will hold on to you," said Lena, and took my hand. The train started moving, slowly climbing the hill, so that from there it would fall down. I looked at the shaved head of the Finger, and suddenly I felt a causeless antipathy towards him; his density, his kind of demonic sense of purpose suddenly began to annoy me. The train climbed up the hill,
The train raced, twisting in a spiral, making a dead loop, rushing down with a crash, so that later the passengers would fly up again, screaming heart-rendingly, and felt only the nails of the girl sitting next to me in my brush, the sweet pain caused by them felt the heat of her thigh pressed to my leg ... When the train stopped, I, reeling, got up and gave Lena a hand. “You are kind of nervous, metro!” She said, peering intently at my pale face. Blaise approached us, saw my scratched hand and darkened. “Well, what's next?” He said. “I want an ice cream, and then a ferris wheel!” Lena replied.
At parting, Lena, smiling, gave me her phone.
That evening I realized that I was hopelessly in love with a girlfriend of my best friend. Three days later I called Lena, and she offered to meet on Mayakovskaya, at the blind wall. She was thirty minutes late. “Well, where shall we go? She asked. I answered - anywhere. We went for a walk in the spring Tverskaya, then turned off, bought ice cream - she ate from my hands, laughing, white drops on my pants, tried to erase - just smeared, reached the Hermitage garden, sat on the bench - she said she was studying in Gnesinka , the future pianist - as an illustration, she started up something like a wave in the stadium, smiled.
I escorted her home, we drove to her station - South-West. “That's my trap!” She joked, and we got out of the car, holding hands. When we were driving up the escalator, and they didn’t understand how it happened, they started kissing. I walked her home. Stopping at the door of her entrance, Lena said that she herself would tell everything to Bleza. “By the way,” said Lena, “I recently got sick with scarlet fever. If you get sick, then consider it a gift from me. ” She smiled, kissed me and slid out the door, leaving me alone. My thoughts were in complete disarray, I did not understand what to do. It was only clear that I had just lost my best friend.
The next day, Blaise did not appear in class. He did not appear in a week. All the teachers pretended that he had never been. His name in the school magazine was neatly taped.
At school, they said that Finger made an appointment with her at the park at three o'clock in the morning (Blaise, like all of us, the pupils of the metroschool, could get in and take anyone to the station with you at any time) to talk. He offered her a ride on a trolley, and she agreed. Apparently, having heard that Lena no longer loves him, he turned into a dead end at full speed, and this dead end became their grave.
By the end of the week I slept with monstrous scarlet fever, the temperature reached forty-three degrees, I was delirious, throwing myself on a wet blanket. I thought of a train rushing in the darkness with dimmed lights, the squeal of wheels, sheaves of sparks, Lena's heart-rending shout tossing in my head. The train raced through endless tunnels, as then, in an amusement park - spinning in a spiral, making a dead loop, rushing down with a roar, then to fly up again. I was tossing about in bed, and Lenin was crying in my ears.
When the temperature was asleep, I realized that I would never go down to the subway again. Just thinking about going down into the earth, into the darkness, hiding behind an unstable electric light, and patiently waiting for its victim, into the eternal predatory darkness that lives under the earth from time immemorial and waiting for us all after death, into the darkness, which is itself death, at the mere thought of it, sticky sweat appears on my back and darkens in my eyes, and an insane cry begins to break from my throat. I am afraid to close the door of my apartment to the castle, and my windows are always open, even in winter.

It happened in between the “Street of 1905” and “Barcadnaya”. The train departed from the "Streets of 1905", but rode rather slowly. I noticed that the tunnel was illuminated and thought that, probably, there was something wrong in the passage. I was driving in the first car, so I heard how the communications dispatcher said something to the driver. I examined only the words "... five minutes." The train began to go even slower and then got up at all. “The traffic lights are closed again,” I thought. And suddenly, the driver opened the driver's cab, the train driver himself came out and went inside the car with the words "Let me ...". I was frightened: do not, God forbid, or something else worse? The driver came up to one of the car doors, in front of all the passengers turned the handle “Turning off the doors”, moved the doors themselves easily and looked into the tunnel. My first thought was that something is not in order with the train, but the driver will now come out on the way to see where there is a problem. However, nothing of the kind happened.
People entered the tunnel from the tunnels of the railway station (they are not sure that it is called that way in the metro), one of whom kept a tool of obscure use in the hand and passed it along with the driver to the cabin, after he had closed the door and finished the aforementioned copy. . The train touched, and the passengers very much began to discuss what was happening: “When they give, give!”, “Who were they?”, “I don’t know, they repaired the way, probably”, “Like miners” ...
So, with smiles, we reached the next station, where I got off, and the metro builders went to the service building. All the passengers in the car for a long time were watching their eyes.

We, perhaps, find it difficult to imagine with what reverence the word “metro” was pronounced in 1935, on the eve of the opening of the first line connecting Sokolniki with the “Park of Culture”. Ordinary mortals, not related to construction, could only guess how the underground palaces look like, Ali Baba’s caves, which are hidden deep under Moscow streets. And the closer the opening day became - May 1 - the more curiosity inflamed, the more weary was the expectation.
It so happened that at that time my grandmother Olya's aunt, the happy owner of two rooms in a communal apartment, gave one of them to two students. The room was a walk-through, and whenever my eighteen-year-old grandmother came to visit her aunt, she walked between two desks, at which purposeful young men gathered at their tasks. One of the students, Grisha Borisenko, worked at Metrostroi. By that time, he had already broken out of the sinkers into small chiefs - in short, he was involved in the mysterious underground kingdom. He often turned to young Ole with questions like: “Do you understand geometry?” - that is, he showed sympathy and disposition. And she decided to ask him to show her the subway, before the opening of which it was less than a month.
Grisha promised - and kept his promise. In the middle of April, two weeks before the launch, he brought Ole a crust in which it appeared that she was an emergency engineer. It was a fine day when the grandmother, in a light summer coat and shoes, followed Grisha through the Metrostroi checkpoint at Dzerzhinskaya station. Down to the platform, led an infinitely long staircase like a stepladder - with wooden cross-beams. “The station of the deepest occurrence!” - Grisha explained and with habitual dexterity he began to climb down into the abyss. Olya followed him. The way to the platform took about eight minutes. Downstairs, the grandmother broke up with her Virgil. Grisha ran to his plot, wishing her good-bye to her grandmother not to get caught in anyone’s eyes. However, the station seemed completely deserted, as if extinct. After some time from the tunnel, a train appeared with three empty carriages - only the driver in front - and the grandmother set off in the direction of Sokolnikov. At each stop the train stood for about five minutes and she managed to inspect the new, sparkling tiles and paint station. But at the “Red Gate” she dreamed, and the train left. “Nothing, nothing!” The grandmother decided. - "I will wait for the one that goes in the opposite direction."
It was very cold - the ventilation at that time was not yet established, and if the April sun was warming up above, then under the ground in a light coat and shoes just a tooth did not fall a tooth. Finally, the long-awaited train appeared. But, unlike the previous one, it was not empty. In one of the cars, a clear command was concentrated, and then my grandmother realized that Lazar Kaganovich, the curator and the founding father of the Moscow metro, was standing in the center of the respectful crowd. Needless to say, the grandmother left hope to leave with this train. However, the driver was in no hurry to push off. Hiding in a niche that decorated the Krasnoselskaya station, the grandmother watched the scene. And this is what happened: Kaganovich wondered what would happen if a person did not have time to enter the car, and would be slammed by the doors. The authorities vied with each other to assure him of the complete safety of the structure, indicating hollow rubber dampers at the junction of the doors. “Good,” said Kaganovich, and put his foot in the doorway, “close!”
The frightened superiors raged and hotly asked to take a word. But Kaganovich did not remove his royal foot. The pale chief ran into the driver's cab and the doors closed. Kaganovich remained intact. The train left, and the grandmother stayed.
Absolutely stiffened, she climbed up the stairs at the deep-water station "Dzerzhinskaya", now "Lubyanka". And how warm, light and intoxicating the Moscow air seemed to her, the air of the spring of 1935 ...

I want to tell two stories. The first happened to me, the second - it is not known with whom, but it also happened. The first is about how the engineer with the assistant deserted.
I drove along the Sokolnicheskaya line on the metro bridge from the center. The metro bridge was already fully repaired and the train was driving along this strange pseudo-tunnel, enclosed by a corrugated iron. I stood in the first car at the door and looked a little forward. Suddenly, the train stopped. "Well, it happens" - I thought. But then the unforeseen happened - the door of the cabin slammed and I saw the back of the driver and assistant moving away. And that's all ... The funny thing is that only I saw it. The rest of the passengers remained in the dark about the flight of the machinists and naively thought that we would soon go. I began to peer into the darkness in front of the train, but from that angle I could not see anything possible. Then something flashed a bluish light - like a short circuit. My mood has completely deteriorated ...
But not for long - after a few seconds I heard lively voices and managed to see two figures in uniform sitting in the cabin. One of the figures in his hand on a string dangled camera soap dish. So, the desire of the metro workers to capture their workdays made me nervous.
The second story is about the Dobryninsk station.
One citizen being drunk and seemed to be driving home along the ring line even after night duty.
He remembered his route badly, but he firmly knew that he was going to leave for Kiev. And so he goes and slumbers. He hears the voice of an aunt, saying: “Be careful, the doors are closing, the next station, Dobryninskaya.”
"Well, that means I'll sleep again," he decided. Rides, sleeps. Again through a dream - the same. Dobryninsky. "These are the times, I slept through my own circle, I did it," the poor fellow decided. Sleeps on. Again the same story ... Well, here he was a little angry with himself and decided to open his eyes and make sure that the next one would be Dobryninsk. Opens and sees - he sits at the station Oktyabrskaya on the bench. And trains are passing by, and in each of them an aunt says her own - “Be careful, doors, etc., the next is Dobryninskaya.” Like this.

We will lie down on Polezhaevskaya, Run along Begovaya, walk on Izmailovskaya, On Taganka - and go home! .. from the song
Victor rode the subway and thought about what most intelligent people in the subway think about: the Metro.
“Be careful, the doors are closing,” murmured the metro voice with the persistence with which educated citizens usually use the phrase “Carthage must be destroyed!”. - “The next station is Prospect Mira.”
The station "Prospect Mira" differed for Victor with special mysticism. On the one hand, it was possible to go to the ring line and get to the “Kurskaya”, where Sveta Shikina lives. On the other hand, it was worth crossing the platform, and the train takes you straight to Yasenevo, and where Yasenevo is, Nadya Yudin is there. It was rumored that in due course “Yasenevo” would be ousted from the market, the route to “Kurskaya” would become a monopoly, passengers would lose the right to choose and Victor would be forced to pay a lot of money for nothing. However, this was not particularly believed. Again, if the antimonopoly committee breaks the metro into separate stations, those will have to compete with each other, prices will fall and Viktor will have an alternative: pay one hundred thousand to the provider at VDNH near the house, or cut to “Teply camp "on foot to get to Yasenevo just fifty dollars.
Even Victor was always surprised by some circularity of the ring line. First, you sit in that one, sit in the other direction — you still get to the Kurskaya. Secondly, there was an opportunity to transfer to the “Yasenevo” and on the “Prospect Mira”, and on the “October”. Thirdly, it is almost impossible to say where it begins and how it ends. And finally, fourth: the traffic on it was higher.
To the sound of the wheels I remembered yesterday’s conversation with the Psychologist (more precisely, a monologue, since the Psychologist mostly talked): “Viktor Semenovich, why don’t you write a book about the metro? Many interesting people drove in it: Yuri Vladimirovich Nikulin, Anton Borisovich Nosik, Nikolai Sergeevich Danilov, who wrote a wonderful parody of my book. Just write every day, write-even-when-not-write ... ”Imagination alternately painted on the dusty wagon glass with an advertisement“ Do not lean against ”vague images: A psychologist persuading Nosik to release the next issue of the“ Evening Metro ”; Psychologist, imploring Rodin to blind his "Thinker"; Psychologist, who is dying to start Dolgoruky, found Moscow: “Listen, this will be a wonderful city! Someday in it will build a subway, which will go wonderful people: Yuri Vladimirovich Nikulin, Nikolai Sergeevich Danilov, Viktor Semenovich ... And be sure to stop by our “Sokolniki!” - the Psychologist smiled then, going sideways from the door of the car. At this point, the thought broke off, giving way to the next one.
Last year, Victor began to notice that, although the metro topology allows you to get from any point to any other, most people use only a few stations. For example, they travel every day from “Arbat” to “Arbat” and back, and in “Tekstilshchiki” there are no more than once a month. How to drag people to "Tekstilshchiki"? Victor did not know.
Next came the question of the existence of such a thing as the “Russian subway”. Is it there, or is it not? Victor guessed that in some flies in London there must be something similar - with trains, electricity, sliding doors and melancholic escalators. Well, so what? What does he, that is, Victor, benefit from this? People are different. The language is different. And life, in general, too. And the Russian subway is a special thing; with its history, with mosaics, with sculptures, with marble and bronze. With faces, backs, kisses. By the way, it was in the subway that Viktor met his first Asya Patrycheva.
Evil tongues used to say that living in the subway is a rather dangerous exercise. It is hot in summer, cold in winter. Under the train you can fall. On foot can tread. Or blow up on a bomb forgotten by terrorists - also easily. And communication in the subway is not communication, but one continuous surrogate. And those who spend too much time on the subway are waiting for mental disorders and long-sleeved shirts. Victor did not agree with them. There, at the top, humanity was tormented by wars, defaults, dandruff and early pregnancies; it was calmer and quieter here. They gnawed their throats and broke their noses; here people relented, read a book or “Moskovsky Komsomolets”, dozed and seemed the most peaceful creatures. There were, of course, such that they run on an escalator or spit chewing gum on the floor, but where are they not? Victor was quite agile about running around and chewing gum every night was scrubbed by specially trained women. In general, you can live.
Another perpetual motion machine: is it possible to make money on the Russian metro? All smart people in one voice argued: no, no, and again no! Impossible, unreal, ineffective. But Victor witnessed with his own eyes how sacks of tokens are being shaken out of the turnstiles, queues stand at the ticket office, newspapers and circus tickets are sold for money, someone plays the violin, others learn "Sorry-that-we-to-you-apply" the rest tyryat trifle pockets. And the next year they promise to introduce not only time-based payment (and why else turnstile printers fix the time?), But also to sell a license to use the metro along with a token. Or to use a token - what's the difference? However, the question was as old as other similar problems: “Will Commerce suffocate Shabolovskaya” and “Are there too many Jews at rush hour?”
Today was a special day for Victor. Performed exactly one and a half years since he became the daily metro Russian metro. How much was it all - and I do not remember. Sometimes it seemed to Victor that now he probably would not have been able to fill Ruthen’s life as meaningfully as ten or fifteen days ago. Nothing - a new morning arrived with new news: someone slipped on a banana peel, someone moved from Chekhovskaya to Tverskaya, someone married an assistant driver. Now he will reach Alekseevskaya, where a meeting with other legendary classics of the Russian metro is scheduled: they will embrace, take a photo of the memory in the Polaroid booth, have a burrito and drink pepsi. And again they will go away - who is on Kakhovskaya, who is in Sokolniki. Life goes on…
Outside the window the familiar design of “Riga” shone with orange light.
“Carefully, the doors are closing,” said a metallic female voice. - “The next station is yours, Victor!”

It was a long time ago - two or three years ago. I was driving along the Kaluzhsko-Riga line and this trip was nothing remarkable, except for one.
You, probably, sometimes noticed that subway trains in tunnels sometimes emit beeps. It would seem for whom? After the above trip I received an answer to this question.
While in the first carriage, I heard the driver emit a couple of beeps, after which the train stopped, and two men in orange vests manually opened the doors, entered the carriage and went to the nearest station.
Now I know that in the daytime there are sometimes people in the tunnels for whom the beeps are meant. What they do there at such a time - I will not put my mind to it.

I want to tell one incident that happened to my friend Fedul Lantsev. However, it is better to let him tell everything:
Today, I and my friend went to the crust. After we drove away from Smolenskaya station, we stopped for 36 minutes in the tunnel! In the car turned off the light. Then we slowly reached the Kievskaya station, we were taken out of the car, the train very slowly drove away from the station and disappeared into the tunnel. We had to go by bus. When we returned (13:45) this metro line was still closed.
Like this.

Here is the story of my girlfriend (a great enthusiast underground adventures).
Prispichilo her, I remember, on Prague - no strength. Well, of course - to the duty officer. Type: where is the institution? And she sends to the mentovka - there, they say, they will tell ...
And the young lady was tipsy, at some other time she might have gone out on the street, and then she went to the cops.
And they only waved to the side of the ladder. There is a girl - barely tolerated. He sees - men are dragging a huge chain with drag ...
And she told them: “Brothers, where is there ...?” The guys threw the chain, took up the girl. They took it down 4 flights of stairs down (right to the tunnel level) and there was a coveted place between the tracks.
Femina was (as already mentioned) not too sober and, saying “thank you”, rushed to the women's institution.
The place turned out to be in line with the most shabby train station in Uryupinsk (forgive me for this nice little town), that is, of the “mountain eagle” type, but our heroine did not immediately realize it. The fact is that the female part was (what luck!) Locked.
A determined friend pulled the door handle marked “M” and ... saw the cop in the eagle posture ... who very politely asked her to use a stall labeled "F" ... Do I need to quote what he heard in response!
A girl, having performed her ritual of cleansing in an unknown way for me, EVEN NONE OF ANY WAY RETURNED back to the station.
She is still ashamed, it was easy to walk on the Moskosky metro in part of the tunnels. TWO trains from TWO sides of the toilet made the greatest impression on the girlfriend ... he said that it was difficult to stay on the point.
Here are the heroic conditions of the Moscow metro workers!

The story was told by my friend's sister.
It was winter in the "rush hour" I do not remember which station in the center. It stands on the platform and cannot enter the wagon at all - there is nowhere to go - like herrings in a barrel. Well, five trains passed. Nerves are already at the limit.
The next train comes up. The people on the platform prepared to go on the attack. The composition stops. And here, directly opposite her, is an empty carriage. Well, no one at all. Like in a dream. In the next crush, but this is empty. What? The people are surprised, but there is no time to think for a long time. The doors to the carriage opened, and everyone crammed into it. The doors closed, the composition went. People go, rejoice, they say miracles happen in life. Drive up to the next station. And then it all opened. There the doors must on the other hand open. And they do not open. Does not work. All in a moment the mood is good lost. All at once began to use foul language. Someone began to try to open the door. Someone to call the driver. On the platform, too, are experiencing, but more calmly. In general, no one managed to get out. Only at the next station the driver came running and released all. They went all, even who did not have to.

I study at the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, commonly referred to as Fiztech, in the city of Dolgoprudny. This is north of the Moscow Ring Road. Since the institute trains a lot of defense, they built it for reasons of secrecy in a not very convenient place for the enemy to travel by electric trains. So among the students go all the jokes connected with the subway (about how it will be laid to us).
But one jingle was just awesome.
On March 31, three or four years ago, a concert took place in the concert hall of the Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology no matter whose, but there were 500-600 spectators. At the end of the concert, a couple of activists stepped onto the stage and called for the following joke on April 1st: posting a gray line continuation of the gray line - the Fiztekh stratum under construction - on the schemes in the subway - just after Altufevo. Right in the hall, packages with stickers were distributed, activists of the sticking groups were selected, a travel schedule was drawn up, etc.
All this was received with enthusiasm and the next day the majority of those present together with the comrades (no less than 500 people) left for posting. During the first half of the day, all the train cars on the gray line and most of the others were glued over.
I must say that the stickers were of the highest quality - the color, font and paper were chosen so that it was only difficult to discern that the Fiztech station was not printed on the diagram, but pasted.
On the fourth of April, Moskovsky Komsomolets was forced to print a refutation, because the editorial office was given questions about the new station (you can only guess how the metro management questions were). Unfortunately, the Physicotechnical Institute did not know in “MK” and wrote that the performers and their goals are not clear. (Your mother !!!)
But this is not the end!
A few months later, the publisher Aist released a calendar with the metro map where Fiztekh Station was. How she got there is not known until now. And even in the publishing house do not know.
And in a few more months another publishing house, issuing a thick guidebook, placed there a metro map that had been reworked from the calendar!
Moreover, in the other directory of this publishing house the station Fiztekh was already active!

Going down the escalator, then. A man stands fifteen years ahead of a granny with a cart and ... somehow, with a sixth sense, she felt, she was approaching the end of the escalator, making an awkward movement and falling. The people begin to fall through it, everything is in shock, panic begins on the escalator, everyone is trying to move away from the approaching heap-mala up the escalator ... In the booth, looking at the platform or whatever it is called silence. I jump onto the handrail with the fifth point, roll down like a stuntman past a mountain of bodies that frown at the end of the escalator .. fall onto the platform ... jump up ... in the eyes and memory of a KURBEL switch with the word "STOP", the hand itself reaches for the switch ... CLICK .... a sigh of relief on the escalator, a scolding and the groans of the "wounded" from the pile ... At this time, the old man who was sitting in the booth and had to do what I did, comes out of a stupor, flies out of the stall and ....
- Do not bother yourself, puppy!
Smile ...)))

The story was at the entrance to the tunnel at the metro station Pervomayskaya. The driver forgets to turn on the lights and the dark squad flies into the cave. One of the passengers (and this can be seen in the light of emergency lighting) kneels in front of the radio communication passenger-driver and gives out about the following pearl:
- Watch out! The driver, says the passenger of the car XXXX: lighting does not work! I repeat: Watch out! The driver, says the passenger of the car XXXX: lighting does not work !!!
The train enters the station "Pervomayskaya", the lights come on, and the driver answers:
- Attention! The passenger, says the train driver of route XX: now I’ll give up everything and I’ll suffer! I repeat: Attention! The passenger, says the train driver of route XX: now I’ll give up everything and I’ll suffer!
A curtain.
The steps at the transition from the Belorussian-ring to the radial are “stamped” on top with something to heighten the lack of sliding of the passengers' feet. So, the step on the fourth from the bottom, instead of the standard stamping, “Vadim is glory!”
I heard this story from the first-hand source of trustworthy. But due to the fact that I did not witness this story, I can not vouch for the truthfulness.
It was in the Novosibirsk Metro. My friend and his brother peacefully descended into the subway. And while passing through the turnstiles, the brother of the acquaintance mentioned decided to use one of the many existing ways to reduce their transportation costs. This offense, of course, did not please the controller and she began to squeal loudly. However, my brother continued his movement, not paying attention to external interference. The supervisor, disillusioned with his ability to prevent this outrage, waved her hand and said: "But you still get under the train."
They descended to the platform and went to the front carriage. At this time, the train arrives, they go along the train, the train passes by them. Here my friend hears a punch and the sound of glass breaking. Turns around - no brother.
It turned out that his brother had been hit by a rear-view mirror on the cab of the rear car, and he had failed between the train and the platform. Immediately I hasten to reassure the reader - there were no bloody scenes, but, I suppose, not without much fright.
Moral: do not worry grandmothers, remember that there is still the power of the word!

It happened in the summer of 1995, when tragic events took place in Budennovsk. I was a second year cadet at the Military University, and our unit patrolled along with the police in the Moscow metro.
Out of boredom, I began to ask passing drivers to take a ride in the cab. Many of them did not agree, but there were good ones. But with one I talked and made two laps along the Zamoskvoretskaya line. The time was later. Suddenly the driver asks me: “Do you want to drive? Saw how I run? ”I was beginning to refuse, but he said that a monkey could control the train. I sat down and steered! I had the honor of driving from Tverskaya to Krasnogvardeyskaya, although I almost passed the station on the Theater, but did not get to the Tretyakov Theater. But the most interesting thing was further on the stretch between Avtozavodskaya and Kolomenskaya, there, if they forgot, the open area: we dispersed the train and began to smoke through the open door. Like this.

In the St. Petersburg metro, at the central stations, in the daytime there is always a rush hour. A lot of people are stuffed into the cars, and the departure of the train is almost constantly delayed (due to the fact that people do not stick at all, and the rod does not fit in any way). Therefore, the train schedule is disrupted.
Usually the dispatcher is scolded by bad words of the drivers, and the machinists are scolded by the bad words of passengers who “prevent the doors from closing”. Most often there are angry phrases like “do not hold the door, do not delay the departure of the train!” But once a cheerful engineer caught himself, who saw how a couple of people could not squeeze into the first car, said jokingly: took a deep breath. At that moment, the doors were closed and the driver continued: “They exhaled, the first car, the next station, Nevsky Prospect.” Everyone smiled and went home in a good mood.

I apologize for the obscene word, but everything was exactly so in the summer of 2001 on the Serpukhovsko-Timiryazevskaya line.
For some reason, the train driver himself had to announce the stations. And here at the next stop throughout the composition loudly from the speaker: “Be careful, the doors are closing. The next station is Lawn ... (pause) ... fuck, Polyanka! ”

Dimanych, a machinist of the Tagano-Krasnopresnenskaya line, my friend from Lyubertsy, told this story.
When the machinist training course comes to an end, the young one rolls around with a mentor to lead the train for the first time. But the old machinist decided to play a trick.
The old driver says to the young man: “Come on, according to the old tradition, so that you always have an OK at work, wave your first train with a pen.”
An unsuspecting young engine driver exits and waits for the train to depart. The old driver closes the door and announces to the passengers: “The experimental train moves without a driver. Passengers are requested to be calm! ”- and is slowly departing. Passengers of the first cars see the driver on the platform, who is waving a pen at them.
After that, at the next station, all the people from the first two cars were blown away, and at the next station, some looked into the driver's cab.

Three years ago, my friend got married and when all the festivities in the restaurant were over, all the guests went home. Since we were "cheerful", then we rode the subway. The movement of such a large crowd began with the Yugo-Zapadnaya metro station.
Almost the entire carriage was occupied by the people traveling from the wedding, but there were also passengers uninitiated in our acquaintance who had nothing to do with us except the neighborhood in one train. Among them, a group of students were traveling apparently from somewhere in South Africa, who were starting to study Russian and read with interest the advertising slogans adorning the carriage to each other.
So, when the stations started with transfers, some of the “parts” of our company began preparing for the exit, and coming to the door they said goodbye to those who continued on their way, and since, I repeat, there were many of us, then they had to turn almost on 180 degrees and with a smile repeat "bye."
At first, the students watched this picture in silence, but the center was getting closer and stations with transfers happened more and more, so almost every one of them had already left, saying goodbye to those who remained in the car.
Finally, our students made a decision for themselves that was so. They thought that in Moscow it was customary to say goodbye when you get out of the car with those who stayed.
And they also began to joyfully reply “bye”, smile and wave after them (by the way, even those who simply went out and did not say goodbye to us, due to the fact that they simply did not know us).
When we left the car, we also told them “bye”, and I even felt some (albeit temporary) pride in what cultural and well-mannered we can even appear on the subway - where we usually drive with a “sour” look.

It was in 2001 at the metro station Tverskaya.
On the platform, as always, the crowd, all a handful at the door stopping places. Suddenly, a voice announces: “There is no landing in the direction of Mayakovskaya station. Get away from the edge of the platform. ”On the platform sigh and everyone is moving away. There is no train. In a few minutes it comes up ... Full ... The doors open, the people from there naturally come out, but no one comes in. Still heard the announcement.
And here is the mute scene: the people who are on the platform are perplexed about where the completed train is going if it does not have a landing. And the people in the cars surprisedly hatched that no one sits. Then someone stepped into the car and the rest of the people also joyfully rushed to take seats.


The story of this misunderstanding is borrowed from my English teacher, Tatiana Nikolaevna Gumennik, now the director of the Moscow International Gymnasium. And this under-experience occurred even in those times when the security of closing the doors of the train was carried out with the help of aunt-controllers armed with a special guard.
So: a group of English-speaking tourists sits in the car.
The aunt-conductor, making sure of the lack of passengers stuck in the door, announces in accordance with the charter: “Ready!” ... Foreigners, slightly embarrassed, amicably leave the carriage. It turned out that the guests decided that they had been ordered to leave the carriage - after all, “Ready!” Really looks like “Get off!”


Dear Sirs,
I am an old Muscovite, I am already 64 years old, I go to the subway every day and often not round-trip, but even more. In general, everything is with you (and therefore with us) well.
One thing bothers me, even more - it is disturbing and angry: why do you have three benches in each car endowed with the words “for the disabled, passengers with children and the elderly”?
It surprises me every time - in these places, even more than in other places, young healthy guys and girls are sitting. Some look at you rather cheekily, others pretend to be asleep (but at their stop they jump up quickly and do not miss it).
Who did you make these beautiful inscriptions for? For us, pensioners? We do not need them. The youth (I will be truthful - not everything, but 75 percent) does not pay the slightest attention to your care for the elderly and, by and large, for the high morality of society.
Previously, at one time regularly, these words about the passengers being polite and giving way to the elderly, disabled, and young children should be heard in the internal radio in the cars. It is still somehow jarred on part of the youth. Now - all for nothing.
I propose: either to re-start a wider and clearer propaganda of normal behavior in the subway, or simply to remove the useless inscriptions in the carriages so that they do not seem to us a mockery. After all, it is no use talking to these young (by the way, quite decent looking) people each time so that they give way to an old woman. Especially as the old women went now timid and quiet.
Do you agree?
Your regular passenger Uncle Sasha.

This story happened to me personally on New Year's Eve, namely December 30, about a year in 1994.
In the spring of that year, a young man met me in the subway (!), Who later became my beloved husband. And then our relationship was just beginning to develop, and we both terribly tried to make a good impression on each other. That’s what my favorite player gives me, since I bought myself a new one.
I am crazy about happiness, not spoiled with gifts, cherishing the player, as the most valuable thing I have, but not forgetting to use it for its intended purpose, I go to work in the morning, the player hangs on my belt. And the food is not one, but with a classmate, whom I happened to meet, and chat. Get me on Avtozavodskoy. And here I am, klusha, all so cool with the player getting out of the car and I feel like my steepness slips somewhere down. And it slides just in the gap between the car and the platform. Well, I, as usual, run to the station attendant with a request and a prayer to get my beloved’s present, the player, my dear. She, naturally, reluctantly responds. But, alas, the unfortunate fall and the location of the player does not allow him to get out of the way.
I sob, trying to rush to the rails for my dear subject, imagining the face of my beloved, stretched out from disappointment. Aunty, he comforts me and says that the current is turned off at three o'clock in the morning, then the servicemen go and that’s what they can lift my dear thing. The truth for the safety of this thing, she does not vouch, because they can pull off. Come, he says, to the attendant at the station, ask her to help you.
And here I am, to the closing of the metro, somewhere in the first hour of the night, I arrive at Avtozavodskaya and start breaking into the attendant at the station, the door of which turns out to be locked. However, there is clearly someone behind the door, and from there comes a disgruntled voice, saying who is there. I begin to babble something about a player that has fallen on the way, about how he is dear to me, and I beg you to let me go for the night. I strictly explain what is not allowed. I insist, and at last the door is plowed open and the disgruntled duty officer, straightening her strayed hair, lets me inside his refuge, in which a satisfied driver sits. It turns out he is her longtime lover, he had free time on duty and they decided to spend this free time with benefits, to congratulate each other on the New Year and exchange gifts. And I, so to speak, broke off all the buzz and was absolutely not helpful. Well, I, of course, not empty-handed,
So I stayed overnight in the subway.
The most difficult thing was not to fall asleep. I wanted to sleep terribly. It turned out that the duty officer at the station is not one, there is one more. And the three of us whiled away the night, eating the hodgepodge brought by one of them.
The strangest and most ridiculous thing was that almost every time an hour they went through a checkout and from the end station to the final one there was a roll call on the selector. Apparently, that would not fall asleep.
Then it was generally funny. The duty officer from the Paveletskaya station informed my duty officer that the traveling workers had stolen the hose from the watering machine and had dissolved with him in the bowels of the tunnel, heading towards us, and asked me to catch these villains and take away their valuable state-owned property.
Well, and my player was safely raised from the rail.
I was put to sleep by a car driver in a cabin, which was driven by the very first train to my house, and I flew through the tunnels of the metro, through the tunnels, happy that my lover’s gift was with me again and he would not be upset that his girlfriend was so messy .
And my mother did not believe that I was spending the night in the subway, and gave me a cool beating at home :-)

My sister and I were invited to the wedding, I as an operator, and my sister in the form of a witness-girlfriend ... In short, we overslept and woke up from the bride's call that they were waiting for us at the registry office, we flew out of the house at a pace and took the subway . I had to go from Vykhino to Medvedkovo, after the transplant, my sister realized that she didn’t have time for dressing up in a festive dress (we’re going to the registrar's office right away!), She approaches the machinist and in a tearful voice tries to explain to him the bride (artistic embellishment, aimed at the driver's pity), is late for her own wedding, she would change clothes in his cabin, while he is carrying us, he cannot, after all, allow the girl to be at the wedding in jeans!
After a minute altercation, he lets her into the cabin, I was in the first car (from the driver’s cabin there is a door to the car), the station to Medvedkovo the driver stretched for 5 minutes so as not to enter the station with the naked girl. I don’t know where he looked when she changed clothes, but I can say for sure (he turned on the light in the cab so she could dress properly) that she was very well reflected in the windshield, like in a mirror, so that the engineer also had fun.
And we had time for the wedding, so it was not in vain.
PS When the driver asked why the dress was not wedding, she explained that she had a nightmare yesterday, didn’t spend the night at home, then overslept, and did not have time to dress in a wedding dress, but only evening dress with her ... Smak!

Imagine the metro station "University" in the evening. All the working people go home after hard work, and I, a student, are not going home from the institute, but to swimming training. Due to the eternal hunger and poverty of the student was a bag of food.
I left the car to the station to eat yogurt and not embarrass others. I chose a place where there are fewer people, it was a shop at the first car. I settled down with kefir, started to drink it and look at the passing trains. Suddenly I see that the doors of the car are closed, but he does not move. At this moment, the carriage leaves the train and goes to me. And here I see his red-headed mustache and a sausage sandwich. He stretches it to me, I froze and could not say anything except "Thank you." And he somehow dissolved.
And my name is Katerina and I am now 28 years old. There are 2 gray hairs, but otherwise everything is fine.

This story happened in early September 2002.
It was in the evening, the train went from Medvedkovo station to Babushkinskaya station. In the first car - only four people. And so, when approaching Babushinskaya station, the train was in the tunnel, the driver looked in the rearview mirror and what he saw threw him into shock. It should be added that the speed of the train at that time was about 50 km / h. And he saw the next thing: a man half climbed out of the vents of the first car, and his hands holding onto the roof of the car, trying to climb on the roof of the car, and, I should add, he succeeded.
At the time of entry to the station Babushkinskaya passenger was already on the roof of the car! And when the train left for the station, this passenger jumps onto the platform on the move and runs away.
And another thing - scraps of his shirt are still hanging on top of the entrance to Babushkinskaya and can be seen from the station.
When you're on the subway, look at the size of the vents and the size of the composition in relation to the tunnel. Such a "trick" is not every stuntman will dare to repeat!
This is a true story, since there are negotiations with the dispatcher, and the driver himself works at the Sviblovo depot.

I'm going home on the bus from Vernadsky Avenue. Driving through Leninsky Prospect. I went to the door to the exit. Here a woman sits, 60 years old, sees a big yellow letter "M" on "McDonald's" and says: "Is this the subway?"
It was five years ago ...
One girl ran into the car just before the doors were closed, and she grabbed her purse. She stooped, and in such a half-bent state, until the next station, she tried to pull her out. The doors finally opened, and the purse was saved. But then the doors close again, and CLOSE HER HAIR.
Until the next station, the girl silently pitied the entire car. But this misadventure is not over. When the train stopped, all the doors except her opened! And only five seconds later they opened. Such are the cases.

I was driving here on the subway, suddenly the company was filled up with: Santa Claus with a guitar, and behind the combo with a battery in the form of a backpack. Playing the right kind of music ... Snow Maiden, also wow, the dress is very short. And the man, in a mask from the movie "Scream", collects money. Immediately somehow the mood rose.



Against the background of all kinds of refugees and cripples, blind, deaf and all sorts of other things, such a company and money is not a sin to pay, after all, indeed, people increase their mood.

It often happens - in the morning the train is going to the subway. Rides, rides, sleepy. Sitting passengers who are not sleeping read. Standing, who does not sleep, swear lazily. In cramped, they are offended. Grandma says: “Hurry up, the whole Moscow would be completely blown up, dick! So that in the subway became freer. And the citizen replies to her: “And all because of the new Russians! In winter, they will drive cars to garages and take the subway - that's a crush! ”
And suddenly, somewhere in the middle of a black tunnel between the stations, the train stops for no reason at all. And immediately silence. Quietly, quietly. All were silent. You just screamed something loudly at your companion’s ear, and at once silence! You can hear how a student at the other end of the car plays music in headphones of a player. Then someone will be indignant. “Lord!” - he will say ... people are late for work. Someone to college. But this “Lord!” Sounds timidly, modestly, in a low voice. Quietly underground ...
The train will stand for a minute or two and travels further.
Why did he stop in the middle of the tunnel? What was waiting for? He missed the kids. Children crossed the road.
Underground children go, of course, at night. But a little more in the morning. In the evening it is very rare, in the afternoon - never.
They go, and do not know where. And it looks like a kindergarten passes the roadway on the way to the park, which is nearby. To the kids among the greens played. Or students go to the same park to engage in physical exercise. Only leading them is not a teacher and not a fizruk, but a teddy bear.
Bear with a torn off paw. And he is big, under two meters! He grew up somehow ... And in childhood he was smaller than a baby in size and with two front paws. Yes, bear also had a childhood. Now he is an adult. Leads children under the ground. Huge has become. Yes, and you can see it! Well, not him, his and his children, only the machinists can be seen, but his shadow on the wall of the tunnel, if you go at the beginning of the first car, is sometimes visible. Look if you want. When I found out, I began to look and saw several times.
Such are the cases. It is clear now why all the metro machinists are alcoholics? That ... After the shift - a full glass at once. You look, let go a little. Sit, smoke and another hundred grams. Then - quietly ... Cry - and fifty more, talk to himself out loud, and more. Sit like that, sit, in the bottle on the bottom will remain - does not finish. He is an alcoholic, of course, but not in that sense. Not so much to drink while you have something. He needs anesthesia, pain spiritual imbalance! The remains of the first carriage bears. Let some homeless find, so happy. God give him! And that’s why the homeless people love the first cars ... The machinist regrets the homeless, he knows, he will soon be like that.
And the children go. At night, mostly, but the morning is exciting. Where to go? The bear seems to understand what he is doing. He's kind of awake. And children - those like in a dream. Know nothing. And on the faces of a smile. Not idiotic, no, but normal, good. As in a dream, the baby is smiling in her crib. And sometimes they will stop on the tracks and look at the train. And smiling. And the car looks at them. So they look at each other - the children are smiling, the car is crying. Then the bear will turn around, look at the driver gloomily, the children will make a sign - let's go, they say, further, do not stand here. And broke up.
When in the morning, at rush hour, the crowded carriage suddenly stops in the middle of a dark tunnel, do not be intimidated. Do not swear, do not think that you are late for work. Here another is required. Cry! Not about the children - they are apparently happy. Not about the teddy bear - he is in the business, there is some meaning in his life. And not about the driver - what is there, a hefty man! Life has lived normally, their children, I suppose, do not roam the subway, and adults are already business. He became one boss, he lives in another city, he does not write, he forgot the old man. But the other one writes regularly, and soon he will come to the Daddy, a prison sentence will be released in half a year.
And you cry about yourself. Do not you feel sorry for yourself? Sorry to tears.
Drunk driver! When, after the shift, you open a warehouse, look more closely - among the ladders, huyapov and all our pieces of wood are there any torn teddy paws? And now - let's speed up, comrades! No need to linger on the tracks, BIG want to drive.

Once, Polina and I were supposed to meet and go to the same bandmate's birthday party. The meeting point is the final station at the head car.
My girlfriend and I stood for a long time and waited for the other girls. In the meantime, we waited, watched the trains come and go. They watched how metropolitan employees promptly work, how they replace each other. Suddenly we wanted to find out where the trains were going - to the park or back. Then came the idea to ride in the cab driver. We did not dare go. Looking out for what kind of look. Found the most good-natured and asked with him. It turned out that the train does not go to the park, but immediately drives back nicely. We went into the booth. He quickly explained where the controls are, where the brakes are. We are off. I, frankly, captured the spirit. It was a kind of attraction. It was so great.
The train reached the premises where there were several more trains, and between them were very narrow platforms on which only one person could fit. The driver gave a signal to a colleague who was ready to go, and stood at the other end of the train. We turned off the lights and went into an empty car. Then the train opened the doors and we landed at the station. So we rode two times with different machinists. Although if they were noticed, they would be deprived of bonuses.
The lad still did not hold on his feet, lost his balance, and plopped his ass on the step.
“Eck, you were blown away,” I thought, but I had nothing to do — by turning the escalator stop handle and, without getting out of the booth, I waited. Seconds after ten boys rose to his feet. Passing through the grabenka, he stopped, swore dirty and slouched, staggering from side to side.
Navepku, on the middle of the line, dangled a handful of people of various kinds, age and class. They walked along the standing escalator, with which they were clearly dissatisfied. Looking askance at them, they were scared and frightened. I got bored.
Called from the machine.
- Well, what else is there ?! - barked pipe. Having received an exhaustive answer, the engine boomed, the steps went down again, crawling under the graben.
Dissatisfied citizens calmed down, drove to the bottom, and, like all normal passengers, they went where.
But, there was, however, one with untypical thinking. As always happens in such cases, the one-man walked to my booth, brilliantly flashed his glasses in a black horny match, and he opened his mouth to say something nasty. “He fought backwards,” I thought, and, brushing aside, told him: “Free!”.
“You are not a machine for me,” the veteran said, “Why do you not warn you when you turn off your escalator ?! - he obviously didn’t want to stop. Well, he asked ...
I got out of the booth, took the veteran by the trunk, and led him to the grabenke.
- You see, old man, this piece of iron ?, - he was taken aback.
“So here’s the old one,” I continued, “this thing is called a grabenka, only the teeth of it are sharper than those of the usual passche. If, say, you sit down on a step, and you do not have time to get up to the grabenka, then, at best, your ass will go to the machine room, leaving your master of the surface. The car, the old man, is very smart and strong - if she is lucky, she will drag you all in there ...
The more I was interested in conversation, the more sadly the veteran became - he clearly already regretted having contacted me.
“Have you ever seen a meat butcher that crawls through the holes of the meat mincer?”, - my interlocutor rubbed and wanted to slip away, but I kept him.
- I haven't finished yet. So, imagine what it will be like for you when you, stepped through a lot of small and large gearboxes of an engine room, become an unfinished chop? I bet you will be at least uncomfortable. You will have a miserable look ... - the veteran whined piteously.
- So, the old man, when someone falls on the escalator, I think the best solution would be if I immediately stop the car, without any warnings, which take half a minute of clean time. During these half-minutes, the car will have time to do with those who have lost it, just like what I just described to you. Are you still mad at me, old man? The old man was not angry. I felt sorry for him.
- Well, okay, old man. You did not know these nuances. I pardon you. But know that there is nothing obstructive than the head that is twisting from beneath the tussock - blooded, with a pulled open lower jaw. Or ... This old man in horny glasses could no longer bear. He escaped from my hands, and with a cry full of wild horror, I rushed out ...
“Poor fellow,” I thought, “now will die of escalators to the very death ... I’ve been replaced. I got up to the top of the room, brewed tea. The door opened and Frofolovna entered. She put the mop in a corner and reported that the composition of number 66, which was following the second path, again killed some rotoei in a small schnitzel.
“Want to see ?,” she asked.
We went down to the platform. There have already accumulated a lot of people. Looking at the creation of the 66th, I read it with pleasure:
- Denis Mark, his mother so!
The driver was inconsolable. He screamed like a child, spat viciously, gritted his teeth and covered his composition with a four-floor mat and a four-floor bragier. It could be understood - the one who was lost, to put it mildly, did not get off with a slight fright. What was worth only brains, smeared on the back wall as much as half of the station. In general, the biggest piece left over from the victim was the head - and that one was blended. Everything else was neatly chopped with heavy wheels, as in a good meat-chopper. “Lord, call someone soon!” Someone screamed.
“Wow!” Whispered one of ours, “the sixth from the beginning of the quarter, and again with us!” Other stations or not?
“To know the fate of him like this, the poor fellow has tormented himself!” Frolovna blurted out something unknown, but immediately turned back from deep thoughts to a harsh reality.
- That's because, fucking root! And I remove all of this Farshmak !, ”she reproached demonstratively, having knocked down the blooded glasses in the black horny leg, kicked off the platform from the blow.

Somehow I’m on the subway from Arbat to Bagrationovskaya, standing at the very beginning of the first car. And suddenly, outside the door, behind the glass, I see a hand ... it knocks on the glass! But this is impossible! Everything around (and me too) is incomprehensible, someone is in shock - eyes are round and they are terrified, someone has already guessed - and is laughing ...
It turned out that the machinists had fun by hooking a huge rubber glove onto some stick, and sticking it out the window, knocking on the door outside ... while they themselves were watching the reaction of the passengers through the door between the cabin and the carriage (after scratching a hole in the painted window doors). These are the fun machinists come across.

I don’t know if my story will be interesting, but when it happened, everyone had a lot of fun.
So ... Moscow, the Day of the city, and not just another one, but a jubilee one - the 850th anniversary of our glorious capital was celebrated. Time - 24 hours. My husband and I are returning home along the Arbatsko-Pokrovskaya branch. The carriage is full, as in rush hour on a weekday. And the train follows not to the final stop, but to the depot, which is located near the metro station Izmailovsky Park. Typically, train drivers in such a situation at each station mumbled that "The train should go to the station Izmailovsky Park." But this time, the driver retreated somewhat from these rules, apparently in honor of the holiday, and gave something like this:
(defiantly) "And the train goes to the station Izmailovsky Park!"
(same) "And so!"
(more sad, drawling) "But I'm not guilty!"

We were returning from New Year's Tree from Tekstilshchikov. My six-year-old little sister was fascinated by the incredible transformations Santa Claus was making that morning at the AZLK Culture Palace. Christmas tree lights were lit and extinguished, wonderful sled scooters suddenly came out, real white fluffy snow was walking, a cheerful wind was whistling, and the good gnomes were so glorious that the children laughed and loudly clapped their hands.
And yet my sister was sad.
“I know, all the make-up and the dwarves are not real ...” she looked at me sadly and fell silent. In her incomplete six years, Julia already knew a lot. She wanted a miracle so much, she wanted to believe in him ... and she could not.
How could I help her? Try to convince her that Santa Claus is real? It is unlikely to succeed. She already knows that there are hundreds of Santa Clauses, they are even called to the house by telephone, and during the break in the performance they smoke at the end of the corridor.
- Be careful, the doors are closing. The next station is China Town.
- Yulia, here you do not believe, but there are still miracles in the world, by the way, even I can do them.
She looks at me incredulously and yet hope glimmers in her eyes.
- True. - I walked in the air with my hands, said a few meaningless words. - Here look. The doors opened all the time on the left, and now they will open on the right.
She did not believe it. She calmly waited for the station to approach in anticipation of a low-grade focus, which she would easily discern.
- Station "China Town", the platform on the right.
In a completely incomprehensible way, the platform really turned out to be on the right, where there has always been a wall so far. On her face is confused. She does not understand how this could happen. During her short life, Yulia managed to travel by subway, got used to the fact that this is a very neat institution where trains are not late, there are no cigarette butts in the underground streets, and the doors always open on the left. She is terribly surprised.
- Be careful, the doors are closing. The next station is Kuznetsky Most.
No, she still does not believe. My little sister is not able to understand it, to explain, this wonderful incident is beyond her understanding of the world, but she wants to make sure that it is not an accident that the miracle really lives next to us and can be done on its own. But Julia understands that I, most likely, will not be able to repeat such a wonderful piece with the doors of an underground train.
- You are welcome! - I again drive in the air with my hands and say a few incomprehensible words. “The doors have just opened on the right, and now we will open them again on the left.”
Impatience, impatience itself was now its whole essence. It seemed that she would not survive the few minutes that separated us from the next station.
That's right, on the “Kuznetsky Most” doors open on the left.
- More more more! - Julia burst through, her eyes shone with delight, happiness, she wanted to work with me and work wonders. She believed ...
- Let's open the doors again on the right. Come on! - She pulls me by the finger and radiates such joy, - now we feel something!
- Well, Julia, people probably don’t understand what is happening with the metro. See how many people are around. We are with you now completely confused. They are probably already tired of our tricks.
She is agree. Yes, people do not need to bother. Let yourself go quietly, calmly go to the left. We know that we can arrange anything with the train. But we will not. We protect his peace.

When the machinist training course comes to an end, the young one rolls around with a mentor to lead the train for the first time. But the old machinist decided to play a trick and said to the young one: “Listen !, I’ll stop at the next station and click on stop, and run to the end of the car and see if we have stopacs, otherwise, both of us. "
Well, at first, the young one gladly agrees and waits for a stop to go out and go to look, and in the meantime the old one cannot help himself from laughing. Well, of course, it comes to the young one, and he falls into the paint, because he still doesn’t know how the designating lights of the train are arranged!

It happened on the New Year 1989 or something like that.
It so happened that my parents came to the Yugo-Zapadnaya station at around one in the morning (they were invited, I think). Naturally, there were no trains at that time; the latter went right under their noses.
After a while of the impasse drove those. composition (something like a crawler, as I understand it). My father, without thinking twice, raised his hand and began to “vote” ... The train stopped, took my parents on board and drove without transfers to Kolomenskaya!
It was worth the pleasure quite decently, at least, more expensive than a taxi, but the mass of impressions!



How amazing the audience of the Moscow metro. Once on the stretch Akademicheskaya-Leninsky Prospect stood up and stood for about fifteen minutes. The heat, summer, morning, people are crammed ... A mocking whisper of the type begins:
“Why are they there,” and so on. The driver understood everything, I don’t know how, and peacefully with a pure heart declares: “Dear passengers, at the Sukharevskaya station, a man came under a train. Keep calm, we will go soon. ” And then it all started:
- Found the time to rush to the rails!
- In Moscow, ten branches, and he pinned on Suharevka!
Like this.

One day a woman with luxurious hair stands just to my left. And just to her left a handsome colonel with a leather folder. Behind the woman is just an aunt who says:
- The girl in your hair is a cockroach.
- What do you mean ???
The colonel picks up the folder and beats the cockroach. Repeatedly. And so delicious. I really thought it would start a fight. And here is a girl with cockroaches in the subway and says to the colonel:
- Thank you very much.

My brother worked in the metro as a machinist on the falcon branch. I ask him:
- Vova, I saw broken windows everywhere, on a tram, on a bus, or on an electric train, but not on the subway.
- I drive to the station "Sportivnaya". All red and white. Spartachi after the championship of some kind. I make slower and siren: fa, fa, fafafa, fafafa, fa, fa. The whole platform is UU-UA-AA! Flies into the cars. I look in the tunnel in the mirror. Carriages stagger here and there. On the "Frunzenskaya" arrived - not a single glass in all cars.




In a crowded car, the guy gives up his place to a pretty girl. She sits down and, after thinking a little, tells him:
- Young man, and you recently in Moscow, right?
He answers:
- This is true. But how did you know?
- Well, you, for example, have given me a place ...
- Um, but you - Muscovite root!
- Yes indeed. And how did you guess?
- And you did not even say thanks.

It was a couple of years ago.
Morning. Rush hour. At one of the stations of the ring line is a train crowded with people. A late man runs along the platform to the train - he wants to catch a departing train. He jumps into the car, but then the doors slammed shut and pushed the poor fellow's head. The head is in the car, and the rest of the body - on the platform.
The driver, not noticing what happened, begins to move. In the car, two other men are desperately trying to open the doors and save the poor guy, but all is in vain. The train continues to accelerate. Everyone understands that a little more, and he will die. And stuck, going over the legs on the platform, with complete calm on his face and voice says: "Well, that's all, fucked up, I got to ..."
Fortunately, the engineer still saw what was happening and stopped the composition. All remained alive. And in my heart I laughed at this humorist.

I was driving once in the morning to my native institute MIEM, which is located on Paveletskaya. And since I was driving from Vykhino station, then I have to transfer to Taganka. I am standing, therefore, on the Taganskaya ring.
The train is coming up, everyone is being pushed there as best they can - everything is as usual, the morning crush. But the train is not moving anywhere, the doors are open. We stand for about 15 seconds. Suddenly a person on duty on the platform flies up to our carriage, and begins to run along the carriage back and forth with uneasy shouts: “Look for the forgotten bag !!! Look for a forgotten bag !!! ".
Here, some woman in the car can't stand the nerves and she screams that there is urine: “BOMBA-A-A-A!” And starts to burst out from the middle of the car!
Her panic at the moment passed on to the people standing around, and everyone began to spill out of the door together. Then the person on duty on the platform flies to this door and with her breast tries to hold off departing people with shouts: “Idiots! At the previous station, the man forgot the dishes in the car! ”
They found the bag in another 10 seconds. They gave it to the duty officer, the doors closed, and we went to Paveletskaya. Before Paveletskaya, all the men in the car were neighing, and the women lowered their eyes to the floor.

I read stories about the metro today, and I remembered a couple of curiosities myself.
I am already the third year, almost every day, I travel along the gray branch from Sevastopol towards the center. And there are a couple of stations on my way: Nagornaya, and immediately after her Nagatinskaya. And they are interesting in their design!
There are swamp motifs on the walls of Nagornaya (gat, plants are relevant, etc.), and on Nagatinskaya, on the contrary, mountain landscapes (all kinds of hills, spurs, men with forks).
I wonder how it happened? Is there any kind of deep idea in this, or have the metro-builders been confused?

And here is another case that happened last year.
I'm going to the subway down the green line. Evening. And here at Avtozavodskaya train stops and costs about 20 minutes! Cops on the platform snooping around. What happened, I learn from the mouth of the passengers who have just entered.
Here is how it was. The man was standing on the platform. Tuck a little (or maybe not slightly). Well, I stood, stood, and then said: “I was tired of waiting for the train, I could walk faster on foot!” And with these words, jumps off on the way and goes through the tunnel in the direction of Kolomna. So we waited for his cops to catch up, to return back to the platform.

It was, in my opinion, the year in 2002. I once drove with friends from the City Day in our own metro. It was already late, eleven o'clock. But there were many people, and the majority were not sober. With the holiday after all. Approaching the Paveletskaya station, two guys quarreled at the other end of the car (almost to a fight). And at the station itself, the situation became very tense. And when the doors closed, the train just started off, one young man splashed out of the other gas canister ... I did not understand at first, but although I was at the other end of the car, I almost immediately felt a sharp poisonous smell, and a bitterness appeared in my mouth, there to talk about passengers who were close to the place where the fight took place.
I felt bad ... And then I remembered that the stage from the Paveletskaya to Avtozavodskaya was one of the longest (almost 3 km). In another part of the car I heard the screams and moans of people ... They began to quickly open the windows. All the noses covered with clothes or a scarf. Fortunately, to my surprise, the train was traveling at a very high speed to the Avtozavodsky station. In general, with difficulty, we drove, we all got out of the car. Victims, fortunately, was not.
This is the story that happened to me. After this incident, for a while I had a lot of bad feelings about the metro.

I want to tell a story that happened to me on 12/28/98. The fact is that on December 30, 1998, I had to pass an exam on artificial intelligence and had to read smart books. I couldn’t sit at home, the room was pressing down on me and I decided to go down with a book on the subway. Skated randomly, read. Suddenly, for some reason, an urge to ride to Medvedkovo. I boarded a train on the Tretyakovskaya street (it was on her that I ended up after 3 hours of skiing). After the train was in the tunnel, some kind of foreboding began to torment me. And indeed, the train just drove away from the "China-City" (he was in the tunnel by half), braked sharply and got up. I sat in the penultimate carriage and saw people standing on the platform watching the passengers sitting on the train in surprise. Parking lasted about 5 minutes. Then the train drove and, apparently, to somehow meet the schedule, he drove like crazy. I was very impressed: at such a speed in the subway, I never drove.
But they arrived at the "VDNH". A strange feeling tormented me more and more. As if I was afraid of something. The book was no longer readable, and I just rode in the car, waiting for something. Drove away from the "ENEA". Suddenly I could smell smoke. At first I thought I was wrong, but no: the carriage began to fill with acrid smoke. There was a panic among the passengers. Breathing gradually became harder and harder. “Well, when is this damned Botanical Garden?” I thought. Finally! We arrived!
Driver's voice: "the train will not go further." I got out of the car and saw a truly impressive sight. From the first car (from somewhere below) thick smoke poured. The station gradually filled with them. People behaved differently: someone shouted something, and someone (including me) looked at it all in surprise. The driver ran with a fire extinguisher, went down the path. The station attendant called firefighters, who, to my surprise, arrived very quickly. In my opinion, the voltage from the contact rail was not removed, because it was extinguished by fire extinguishers. It all lasted 30 minutes (That's for sure, because I occasionally glanced at the station clock). Movement restored at 21:30.
After returning home, I watched the news for two days, thought something would be said about it, but for some reason they did not say anything about it. I can imagine what people experienced on the train that followed mine. After all, they had to stand in a tunnel for half an hour and smell smoke. And the train was chock full of passengers, I nevertheless drove it to the “Medvedkovo”.
PS That “fatal” train was number 52.

Everyone says, “The Kremlin, the Kremlin.” I hear about it from everybody, but
I’ve never seen it myself. How many times (thousands) I’ve walked, drunk or hung
over, across Moscow from north to south, east to west, from one end to the
other, one way or another, and never did I see the Kremlin.
Take yesterday. Again I didn’t see it, and I spent the whole evening wandering
around those parts, and I wasn’t even so drunk. As soon as I came out of the
Savelovo Station I had a glass of Zubrovka to start with, since I know from
experience that they’ve not come up with anything better by way of an eyeopener.
So. A glass of Zubrovka. Then later, on Kaliaevsky Street, another, only not
Zubrovka this time but Coriander. One of my acquaintances says that Coriander
vodka has antihuman effect on a person; that is, it strengthens all the physical
members but weakens the soul. With me it happened the other way around for
some reason; that is, my soul was strengthened in the highest degree while my
members were weakened. But I agree that this too is antihuman. Therefore, at
the same time, I added two mugs of Zhiguli beer and an Albe de dessert port
straight from the bottle.
Of course you’ll ask, “Then what, Venichka, then what did you drink?” But I
can’t figure out what I drank next. I remember – this I remember clearly – on
Chekhov street I downed two glasses of Hunter’s. But really, could I cut across the
Sadovy Circle without a drink? No, I couldn’t. Which means I drank something
else.
Then I headed for the center of town, since it always works out that when I’m
looking for the Kremlin I end up at the Kursk Station. In fact, I really did have to go
to the Kursk Station and not the center of town, but I set out for the center all the
same in order to see the Kremlin at least once meanwhile thinking, “I won’t see
any Kremlin anyway and I’ll end up right at the Kursk Station.”
Now I’m almost in tears feeling sorry for myself. Not because I didn’t get to the
Kursk Station yesterday, of course. (That’s nonsense – if not yesterday, then today
I’ll get there.) Naturally not because I woke up this morning in some unfamiliar
front hallway or other. (It turns out that I sat down on the step in the hallway, the



fortieth from the bottom by count, grasped my suitcase to my heart, and fell
asleep like that.) No, I’m not feeling sorry because of that. No, I’m sorry because I
just calculated that from Chekov Street to this hallway I drank up six rubles – but
where and what and in what sequence, to good or evil purpose? This nobody
knows and, now, nobody will ever know. Just as we don’t know to this day
whether Tsar Boris killed the Tsarevich Dmitri or the other way around.
What sort of hallway was it? I haven’t the slightest idea even now, and it ought
to be that way. Everything should. Everything should take place slowly and
incorrectly, so that man doesn’t get a chance to start feeling proud, so that man is
sad and perplexed.
I came outside when it was already getting light. Everyone knows – everyone
who has ended up out cold in a hallway and left at dawn – everyone knows what
a heavy heart I carried down those forty steps in a strange hallway, and what a
weight I carried outside.
“It’s nothing,” I said to myself. “Nothing. There’s a pharmacy, see?” And over
there, that creep in the brown jacket scraping the sidewalk. You see that too? So
calm down. Everything is going along as it should. If you want to turn left,
Venichka, turn left, I’m not forcing you to do anything. If you want to turn right,
turn right.”
I turned right, staggering a bit from the cold and from grief, yes, from the cold
and from grief. Oh, that morning burned in the heart! Oh, the illusory nature of
calamity. Oh, the irretrievable! What’s worse about this burden which no one has
yet called by any name, what’s worse – paralysis, or nausea? Nervous exhaustion
or mortal sorrow somewhere in the region of the heart? But, if that all equal, then
all the same what’s worse about it – stupefaction, or fever?
“It’s OK, it’s OK,” I said to myself. “Back to the wind and get going slowly. And
breathe slow, slow. Breath so that your knees don’t get tangled. Go on,
anywhere. It’s all the same where. Even if you turn left, you’ll end up at the Kursk
station; or straight, all the same, the Kursk Station. Therefore, turn right, so that
you’ll get there for sure. Oh, vanity.
“Oh, the ephemeral! Oh, that most helpless and shameful of times in the life of
my people, the time from dawn until the liquor stores open up! How many
unnecessary gray hairs has it caused us homeless and grieving brunets! Let’s go,
Venechka, let’s go.”



MOSCOW. KURSK STATION SQUARE
There you are. I did know what I was talking about. You turn right and inevitably
you get to the Kursk Station. You were bored there in the back alleys, Venichka,
and you wanted to rub elbows with the crowd, so there you are.
“Oh, forget it.” I gave myself the brush-off “Do I really need your crowd? Are
your people really necessary? Take the Redeemer even, who to his own Mother
said, “What art thou to me?” And, indeed, what do these vain and repellent
creatures have to do with me?
“I’d better lean up against a column and screw up my eyes, so I won’t feel so
sick.”
Of course, Venichka, of course, someone sang out on high, so softly, so
tenderly, tenderly. Screw up your eyes so you won’t feel so sick.
Oh! I recognize them. It’s them again! The angels of God! It’s you again.
But of course it’s us. Again, so tender!
“You know, angels?” I asked also softly, softly.
What? the angels answered.
“It’s tough for me.”
Yes, we know that’s tough, the angel sang out. But get moving, you’ll feel
better, and the stores will be open in half an hour – no vodka until nine, it’s true,
but they’ll have a little red the first thing.
“Red wine?”
A little red wine, the angels of God chorused.
“Chilled?”
Chilled, of course.
Oh, I got terribly excited.
“You say get moving, you’ll feel better. But I don’t feel like moving at all. You
know yourselves what sort of shape I’m in . . . to get moving!”
The angels kept quiet about that. And then started singing again.



You know what, drop by the restaurant at the Station. They’ve got something
there. Yesterday, they had sherry. It couldn’t have been all drunk up one evening.
“Yes, yes, yes. I’ll go. I’ll go right now and find out. Thank you, angels.”
Your health, Venya.
And then ever so gently:
Don’t mention it.
They’re so nice. . . . Well, let’s . . . get moving then . . . It’s a good thing I bought
some goodies yesterday – you can’t go to Petushki without goodies. It was the
angels who reminded me about the goodies, because I bought them for the ones
who are themselves like angels. It’s good thing you bought them. When,
yesterday, did you buy them? Remember . . . Walk and try to remember. . . . .
I walked across the square. Rather, I was drawn across it. I stopped two or
three times and froze on the spot in order to get the queasiness under control.
Because, after all, a person has more than just a physical side. He has a spiritual
side as well and, more than that, there’s a mystical, a super spiritual side. So,
there I was in the square expecting any minute to get sick on all three sides. And,
again, I’d stop and freeze.
“So, when was it you bought your goodies yesterday? After the Hunter’s? No,
after the Hunter’s I wasn’t up to buying presents. Between the first and second
glass of Hunter’s? No, between the two glasses there was a break of thirty
seconds, and I’m not superhuman and able to get something done in thirty
seconds. Anyway, a superhuman being would have collapsed after the first glass
of Hunter’s and never made it to the second. So when was it? By the grace of
God, how many mysteries there are in the world! An impenetrable veil of
mysteries. Before the Coriander or between the beer and the Albe de dessert?”

MOSCOW. THE KURSK STATION RESTAURANT
“No, not between the beer and the Albe de dessert for sure. There was no
break then at all. So, probably before the Coriander, that’s quite possible. Or,
more likely, I bought the nuts before the Coriander but the candy after. Or,
perhaps, the other way around. When I’d drunk the Coriander, I . . .”



“There’s nothing to drink,” the bouncer said. And he looked me over as if I
were a little dead bird or a filthy buttercup. “No, nothing alcoholic.”
Though I cringed in desperation, all the same I managed to mumble that I
hadn’t come for that anyway. It’s none of his damned business why I was there.
Perhaps the Perm Express didn’t want to go to Perm for some reason and so I
came to eat beef Stroganoff and listen to Ivan Kozlovsky or something from The
Barber of Seville.
I had taken my little suitcase with me anyway, and, just as back there in the
front hallway, I squeezed it to my heart, expecting a command.
Nothing to drink! Mother of God! Indeed, if you believe the angels, they’re
fairly drowning in sherry in here. But now there’s only music and music with some
kind of mangy harmonics at that. Yes, that’s Ivan Kozlovsky all right. I recognized
him immediately; there’s no one else with a voice that nauseous. All singers have
equally nauseous voices, but every one of them is nauseous in its own way. That’s
why I can identify them so easily. Well, of course: Ivan Kozlovsky. “Oh, Chalice of
my fore-bear-ers, Oh, let me gaze for-e-ever upon you by star-r-r-r light.” Well, of
course: Ivan Kozlovsky. “Oh, why am I smi-i-tten so with you. Don’t reje-e-ect
me.”
“Will you be ordering anything?”
“What’ve you got, just music?”
“What do you mean, just music? Beef Stroganoff, pastries, udder . . . “
I felt sick again.
“What about sherry?”
“No sherry.”
“Interesting, you serve udder but not sherry.”
Verrry interesting. Right, no sherry, but udder we’ve got.”
And I was left alone. So as not to get sicker I started to examine the chandelier.
But really too heavy. If it should break away and fall on someone’s head, it’d be
terribly painful. Well, no, probably not even painful. While it’s tearing away and
falling, you’re sitting, not suspecting a thing – drinking sherry, for instance. But as
soon as it hits you, you’re dead. A weighty thought, that . . . you’re sitting there



and a chandelier falls from above. A very weighty thought. But, really, why so
weighty? If, let’s say, you’ve been drinking sherry, if you’re good and drunk and
haven’t yet succeeded in getting hung over, and they don’t give you any sherry,
and then you get a chandelier in the head, that’s weighty. A very oppressive
thought. One not everyone has the strength to endure, especially when dead
drunk.
And you’d agree to it, if they’d bring you, let’s say, 800 grams of sherry in
return for which they’d unhook the chandelier over your head and . . .
“So, have you made up your mind? Are you ordering something or not?”
“Eight-hundred grams of sherry, please.”
“You’re already doing well enough, obviously. You were told in plain Russian
we don’t have any sherry.”
“So . . . I’ll wait . . . until you’ve got it . . .”
“Wait, wait . . . You’ll get your sherry all right.”
Again, I’m left alone. As she left, I looked at the woman with repulsion.
Especially at her white stockings without any seams – a seam would have made
me feel at peace, perhaps even unburdened my soul and my conscience.
Why are they all so crude? Eh? And so blatantly crude at the very moment
when one oughtn’t to be crude, when a person has all his nerves dangling out,
when he is chicken-hearted and placid? Why is it always like that? Oh, if only the
whole world, if everyone were like I am now, placid and timorous and never sure
about anything, not sure of himself nor of the seriousness of his position under
the heavens – oh, how good it could be. No enthusiasts, no feats of valor, nothing
obsessive! Just universal chicken-heartedness. I’d agree to live on the earth for an
eternity if they’d show me first a corner where there’s not always room for valor.
“Universal chicken-heartedness.” Indeed this is the panacea, this is the predicate
to sublime perfection. And as for nature’s activist inclinations . . .
“Who’s getting sherry here?”
Looming above me were two women and a man, all three in white. I looked up
at them and, oh, how much ugliness and vagary there must have been in my eyes
then. I knew that just by looking at them, because my ugliness and vagary were
reflected in their eyes. I felt myself sinking somehow and losing a hold on my soul.



“Yes, well, I’m . . . almost not asking. Well, so, there isn’t any sherry, I’ll wait, I’ll
just . . .”
“Whadaya mean ‘just’? What do you think you’re going to ‘wait’ for?”
“Oh, nothing much. I’m just going to Petushki, to a beloved young lady.” To a
beloved young lady, ha, ha. “I’ve bought some goodies, see.”
They waited, the executioners, to see what I would say next.
“I’m . . . from Siberia, I’m just a kid. And just so I won’t get sick, I’d like some
sherry.”
Pointlessly, I mentioned sherry again and that set them off at once. All three of
them grabbed me under the arms and led me – oh, the pain of such a disgrace –
across the entire Station and shoved me out side. And, after me, my little suitcase
with the goodies.
Outside again. Oh, emptiness, oh, the bared fangs of existence.

MOSCOW. TO THE TRAIN BY WAY OF A LIQUOR STORE
What it was like from the restaurant to the store and from the store to the train,
human language cannot bend itself to describe. I won’t try either. And if the
angels should take it up, they’ll break into tears and the tears will prevent them
from getting anywhere.
Instead, let’s do this: let’s honor those two deadly hours with a minute of
silence. Remember those two hours, Venichka. In the most ecstatic, in the most
sparkling days of your life, remember them. In moments of bliss and rapture, do
not forget them. They should not be repeated. I turn to all whose hearts are poen
to poetry and fellow feelings:
“Leave what you’re doing. Stop together with me and honor with a minute of
silence that which is inexpressible. If you’ve got any kind of an old noisemaker,
whistle, or horn handy, let’s hear it.”
So. I also stop. Exactly one minute, standing like a column in the middle of the
Kursk Station Square, I stare darkly at the station clock. My hair one moment
flying in the wind, now standing on end, now flying again with taxis flowing
around me on all four sides. People, too, and they look at me wildly, undoubtedly



thinking, “Should he be sculpted like that for the edification of the people of the
future, or not?”
And the silence is broken only by a husky female voice pouring down from
nowhere.
“Attention. Leaving from siding number four at 8:16, the train for Petushki.
Stops in Hammer and Sickle, Chukhlinka, Reutovo, Zheleznodorozhnaya, and
beyond at all stations except Esino.”
But I remain standing.
“I repeat. Leaving from siding number four at 8:16, the train for Petushki. Stops
in Hammer & Sickle, Chuklinka, Reutovo, Zheleznodorozhnaya, and beyond at all
stations except Esino.”
Well, that’s it. The minute has passed. Now, of course, everyone pounces on
me with questions. “Hey, you get some booze, Venichka?”
“Yes, I tell you, I’ve got some.” And I continue walking in the direction of the
platform, inclining my head to the left.
“Your suitcase is heavy now, right? And there’s a song in your heart, right?”
“The suitcase is heavy now, that’s right. But as far as my heart goes, it’s too
early to tell.”
“All the same, Venichka, so what did you buy? We’re terribly interested.”
“Yes, I can tell. Just a minute, I’ll list it all: first, two bottles of Kubanskaya for
two sixty-two each; total, five twenty-four. Next, two quarter bottles of
Rossiiskaya at a ruble sixty-four; total, five twenty-four plus three twenty-eight,
eight rubles fifty-two kopeks. And then some red. Just a moment, I’ll remember.
Yes, stout rose for one ruble thirty-seven.”
“So-o-o,” you say. “And the grand total? This is really terribly interesting.”
“The grand total is nine rubles eighty-nine kopeks,” I say, stepping onto the
platform. “But that’s not really the grand total. I also bought a couple of
sandwiches so as not to puke.”
“You mean ‘so as not to throw up,’ Venichka?”



“No, what I said I said. I can’t take the first dose without a bit to eat, because I
might puke otherwise. But the second and third now, I can drink straight, because
it’s OK to feel sick, but I won’t start puking no matter what. Right up to number
nine. And, there, I need another sandwich.”
“How come? You’ll throw up again?”
“Oh, no, I won’t throw up for anything. But as for puking, I’ll puke.”
Of course, you all nod your heads at that. I even see from here, from the wet
platform, how all of you scattered about my world are nodding your heads and
getting ready to be ironic.
“How complicated that is, Venichka, how subtle?”
“You said it.”
“Such clarity of thought. And that’s all it takes to make you happy? Nothing
more?”
What do you mean, ‘nothing more?’ “I say, getting on the train. “If I’d had
more money I would have taken along some beer and a couple of bottles of port,
but unfor-“
Here, You really begin to moan.
“O-o-o-o, Venichka! O-o-o, you primitive.”
“So shat of it? So I’m a ‘primitive,’” I say. But I’m not going to answer any more
of your questions. I’ll just sit here hugging my suitcase to my heart and looking
out the window. Like this. A “primitive.” Fine!
While you go on pestering me.
“What’s with you. Offended?”
“Course not,” I answer.
“Don’t get offended, we wish you well. Only why are you such a fool hugging
your suitcase to your heart? Because the vodka is in there, is it?”
Now I’m thoroughly offended. What’s the vodka got to do with it?



“Attention, passengers, this train goes to Petushki. Stops in Hammer & Sickle,
Chuchlinka, Reutovo, Zheleznodorozhnaya, and beyond at all stations, except
Esino.”
After all, what’s the vodka got to do with it? Aren’t you sick of talking about
the vodka? In the restaurant I was hugging it to my heart, and there was no vodka
in it then. And in the hallway, if you remember, I also hugged it close, though
there wasn’t even a whiff of vodka in it yet. If you want to know everything, I’ll
tell you, but wait. I’ll tie something on Hammer & Sickle and

MOSCOW – HAMMER AND SICKLE
then I’ll tell everything, everything. Be patient. Aren’t I being patient?
Well, of course, they all consider me a bad person. In the morning and hung
over as I’ve been, I’m of the very same opinion about myself. But, after all, it’s
impossible to trust the opinion of a person who hasn’t yet been able to tie one
on. On the other hand, what chasms open up in me in the evening, if I’ve gotten
good and looped during the day. What chasms.
But, so what. So what if I’m a bad person. I’ve noticed that, in general, if a
person feels nasty in the morning but is full of plans and dreams and vigor in the
evening, he’s a very bad person. Mornings, rotten; evenings, fine – a sure sign of a
bad type. But take someone who’s full of energy and hope in the morning, but
overwhelmed with exhaustion in the evening – for sure he’s a trashy, narrowminded mediocrity. That sort of person is disgusting to me. I don’t know how he
strikes you, but to me he’s disgusting.
Of course, there are those for whom morning and evening are equally pleasing,
who are equally pleased by sunrise and by sunset. These are simply bastards. It’s
sickening even to talk about them. But then, if someone is equally repulsed by
morning and evening, I really don’t know what to say about him. That’s the
ultimate cocksucking scum. Because our stores stay open till nine and you can
always get something at the big Eliseev grocery up till eleven, so if you’re not
scum, by evening you’ll always be able to create some sort of little chasm.
And so, what do I have here?



I took everything I had out of the suitcase and fingered it, from the sandwich to
the stout rose at a ruble thirty-seven. Touched it and suddenly started to grieve,
and grew dim . . . Lord, you see what I possess. But truly is this necessary to? Truly
is this what my soul is pained over? This is what people have given me in
exchange for that over which my soul is pained. But if they had given me that,
would I really need of this? Look, Lord, here’s the stout rose at a rub’ thirtyseven.”
And, all in blue flashes of lightning, the Lord answered me:
“So what did St. Teresa need her stigmata for? It, too, was unnecessary, yet
she desired it.”
“That’s the point,” I answered in ecstasy. “Me, too, I desire this, but it’s not at
all necessary.”
“Well, since it’s desired, Venichka, go on and drink,” I said to myself, but took
my time. To see if perhaps the Lord had anything else to say.
The Lord was silent.
OK, then. I grabbed one of the quarter bottles and went out to the vestibule.
Well, my spirit has grieved in confinement for four and a half hours – mow I’ll let
it out to roam. I have a glass and a sandwich, so as not to throw up. And I have a
soul, till now barely open to impressions of being. “Share with me my repast,
Lord.”

HAMMER AND SICKLE – KARACHAROVO
And I drank it straight down.

KARACHAROVO – CHUKHLINKA
I drank it, and you saw how long I went on making a face and holding back the
nausea, how I swore and cursed. Five minutes, seven minutes, a whole eternity I
flung myself by the throat, entreating God not to offend me.
Right up to Karacharovo, from Hammer and Sickle to Karacharovo, God was
unable to hear my prayer. The glass I had drunk first seethed somewhere



between the maw and the gullet, then billowed upward, then subsided again. It
was like Vesuvius, Herculaneum, and Pompeii, like the First of May salute in my
country’s capital. And I suffered and prayed.
And it was only at Karacharovo that God heard my prayer and heeded it.
Everything settled down and got quiet. And, with me once anything gets quiet
and settled down, it’s irrevocable. Rest assured, I respect nature; it wouldn’t be
nice to return nature’s gifts to her.
I smoothed my hair down a bit and returned to the car. The other passengers
looked at me almost indifferently with their round, vacant eyes.
I like that. I like that my country’s people have such empty, bulging eyes. This
instills in me a feeling of legitimate pride. You can imagine what the eyes are like
where everything is bought and sold –deeply hidden, secretive, predatory and
frightened. Devaluation, unemployment, pauperism . . . People look at you
distrustfully, with restless anxiety and torment. That’s the kind of eyes they have
in the world of Ready Cash.
On the other hand, my people have such eyes! They’re constantly bulging but
with no tension of any kind in them. There’s complete lack of any sense but, then,
what power! (What spiritual power!) These eyes will not sell out. They’ll not sell
or buy anything, whatever happens to my country. In days of doubt, in days
burdensome reflection, at the time of any trial or calamity, this eyes will not blink.
They don’t give a good Goddamn about anything.
I like my people. I’m happy that I was born and grew up under the gaze of
those eyes. There’s only one thing bad about it, though. What if they noticed
what I was up to in the vestibule – turning somersaults from one corner to the
other, like the great Feodor Chaliapin in some tragedy, with my hand on my
throat, as if something were choking me to death.
Any why not, let them. If anybody saw, all right. Perhaps I was rehearsing
something out there? Right . . . come to think of it. Perhaps it was the immortal
drama of Othello, the Venetian Moor? I was playing it alone – all the roles at
once. I deceived myself, betrayed my convictions. I whispered in my ear about
myself, oh, what I whispered! And there I am, in love with myself for my suffering
– and I started to strangle myself. Grabbed myself by the throat to strangle
myself. What’s it to them what I was doing out there?



Look at that pair over there, on the right, next to the window. One of them is
so stupid in his quilted jacket. But the other is so-o-o intelligent in his worsted
overcoat. And, if you please, they’re not embarrassed by anyone, pouring
themselves drinks and putting it away. They don’t run out to the end of the car
wringing their hands. The stupid one drinks, grunts, and says, “Sonovabeech, not
bad!” But the other, intelligent one drinks and says, “Tran-scen-den-tal!” And in
such a festive voice. The stupid one takes a bite to eat and says, “Tastes fan-n-ntastic today. Outa’ this world.” The so-o-o intelligent one chews and says, “Yes-ss. Tran-scen-den-tal.”
Incredible. I return to the car, wondering, had I been taken for a Moor, or did
they think ill of me? While these two drink hearty in the open like the crown of
existence, feeling superior to the whole world, I’m hung over in the morning and
hide from heaven and earth, because this is the most intimate of intimacies.
Before work, I drink on the sly. At work, I drink on the sly, but these two transcen-den-tal!
My delicate nature is indeed detrimental to me. It correupted my childhood
and adolescence. More precisely, it was not delicacy but simply that I had
infinitely expanded the sphere of intimacy – how many times has this destroyed
me.
I’ll give you an example. I remember ten years ago I moved to OrokhovoZuevo. At that same time, there were four other people living in the same room. I
was the fifth. We lived in complete harmony, and there weren’t any quarrels
among us. If someone wanted to drink port, he’d get up and say, “Boys, I want to
drink port.” And everyone would say, “Good, drink port. We’ll drink port with
you.” If somebody was inclined to drink beer, everybody was inclined to drink
beer.
Wonderful. But suddenly I started to notice that the four of them were
somehow pushing me away. They would whisper amongst themselves, looking at
me as I left the room. This was all a bit alarming for me. And I read the same
preoccupation – fear, even – on their physiognomies. “What’s the matter,” I
asked myself torturedly. “Why is this happening?”
And then came the evening when I understood what was what and why it was
happening. As I recall that day, I never even got out of bed. I had drunks some
beer and started grieving. So I simply lay there and grieved.



And all four of them quietly sat down around me, two on chairs at the head of
the bed, and two at the foot, looking me reproachfully in the eye, with the
bitterness of people unable to apprehend some secret locked within me. Just as if
something had happened.
“Listen, you,” they said. “Cut it out.”
“Cut what out?” I said with surprise, sitting up.
“Cut out thinking that you’re better than anyone else. That we’re small
potatoes and you’re tops.”
“Hey, what are you talking about?”
“This is what we’re talking about. You drank beer today?”

CHUKHLINKA – KUSKOVO
“I did.”
“A lot?”
“A lot.”
“So get up and go.”
“Go where?”
“As if you don’t know. It works out like this: we’re nothing but gnats and
scoundrels and you’re tops.”
“Excuse me.” I say, “I didn’t suggest anything of the kind.”
“You did suggest it. You suggested it every day since you moved in with us. Not
in word but in deed. No, not even in deed, but by the absence of a deed. You
negatively suggested it.”
“What ‘deed’, what ‘absence’?” I stared at them with wide-eyed amazement.
“You know what deed. You don’t go to the toilet, that’s what. We felt right
away there was something funny. From the time you moved in we’ve not seen
you go to the toilet once. OK, we’re not speaking about number two. But not even
number one, not even number one!”



All of this was said without a smile, in a deadly offended tone.
“No, boys, you don’t understand me.”
“We understand you perfectly.”
“Wait, no, you don’t. I simply can’t get up from bed like you and announce
publicly, ‘Well, friends, I’m off to take a leak’ or ‘Well, boys, I’m going to take a
crap.’ I can’t do that.”
“And why can’t you? We can, but you can’t. It works out that you’re better
than we are. We’re filthy animals and you’re a lily.”
“Not at all… How can I explain it to you?”
“There’s nothing to explain, it’s all quite clear to us.”
“Just listen… understand… in this world there are things…”
“We know as well as you do what kind of things there are and what there
aren’t…”
I couldn’t get anywhere with them. They had penetrated to my very soul with
their morose expressions. I started to give in.
“Well, of course, I also can… I could…”
“That’s it – you can, like us. But we can’t like you. You can do anything, of
course, while we are unable to do anything. You’re tops and we’re spit under your
feet.”
“No, no.” Here I got completely muddle. “In this world there are spheres where
it’s impossible to simply get up and go. Because of self-restraint or whatever, the
precepts of shame, from the days of Ivan Turgenev and, then, the idealism of
Herzen’s youth. And after that to get up and say, ‘Well, boys… it’s insulting. I
mean, supposing someone had a delicate heart…”
All four of them looked at me with mayhem in their eyes. I shrugged my
shoulders and shut up, hopelessly.
“Forget about Ivan Turgenev. Be careful what you say. We’ve read him
ourselves. You’d be better off saying whether you drank beer today.”
“I did.”



“How many bottles?”
“Two big ones and one small one.”
“So get up and go. So we can all see you leave. Don’t humiliate us and don’t
torture us. Get up and go.”
So I got up and went. Not to relieve myself but to make things easier for them.
And when I returned, one of them said to me, “With such feelings of shame you’ll
always be alone and unhappy.”
Yes. He was absolutely right. I know many of God’s intentions, but why he
invested me with such chaste feelings I’ve never been able to figure out. And this
chastity of mine – this is the funniest thing about it – this chastity of mine has
been interpreted so inside out that I have been refused even the most
elementary courtesies.
For instance, in Pavlovo-Posad. They take me to meet the ladies and present
me like this:
“Here you have the very famous Venedikt Erofeev. He’s well known for many
reasons. But most of all, of course, for the fact that, in his whole life, he has never
passed gas…”
“What! Never once?” The ladies are astonished and all eyes; they look me
over. “Not once!”
I start getting flustered, of course. I cannot not get flustered in the presence of
ladies. I say, “Well, not really, somehow! Sometimes… all the same…”
The ladies are even more astonished. “Erofeev! And… how strange…
‘Sometimes, all the same’!”
I get completely flustered by all this and say something like, “Well… what’s so,
you know, I too… after all, it’s – to pass gas – it’s, after all, rather noumenal.
There’s nothing at all phenomenal about passing gas.”
“Just think…” The ladies are crazy about all this.
But, later, they trumpet it all over the Petushki line that “he does it audibly,
and he says that he does it not badly! That he does it quite well.”



So, you see. And so it has been all my life. All my life this nightmare has
haunted me, this nightmare of being understood not just wrongly, but in exactly
the opposite way to what I intend.
I could tell you plenty about this subject, but if I start telling everything, I’ll
stretch it out as far as Petushki. I’d better give just one single case, because it’s a
completely fresh one – how, a week ago, they removed me from my post in the
brigade for “introduction of a fallacious system of individualized charts.” Our
entire Moscow management quivers with fear whenever they merely remember
those charts. And, really, what was so bad about them?
Where are we at the moment?
Kuskovo. We’re going to barrel right through Kuskovo without stopping. I
should have another drink on the occasion, but first I’d better tell you,

KUSKOVO – NOVOGIREEVO
and then I’ll go out and have a drink.
So. A week ago I was kicked out of me job as brigade foreman, which I’d gotten
five weeks ago. In four weeks as you can understand, I couldn’t have introduced
any great changes, and even if anybody thought that I’d introduced any, all the
same they didn’t sack me for great changes.
Before I was made foreman, our work schedule looked like this: in the morning
we’d sit down and play blackjack for money. Then we’d get up and unwind a
drum of cable and put the cable underground. And then we’d sit down and
everyone would take his leisure in his own way. Everyone, after all, has his own
dream and temperament. One of us drank vermouth, somebody else – a simpler
soul – some Freshen-up eau de cologne, and somebody else more pretentious
would drink cognac at Sheremetievo International Field. Then we’d go to sleep.
First thing next morning, we’d sit around drinking vermouth. Then we’d get up
and pull yesterday’s cable out of the ground and throw it away, since, naturally, it
had gotten all wet. And then what? Then we’d sit dawn to blackjack for money.
And we’d go to sleep without finishing the game.
In the morning, we’d wake each other up early. “Lekha, get up. Time to play
blackjack.” “Stasik, get up and let’s finish the game.” We’d get up and finish the



game. And then, before light, before sunrise, before drinking Frenshen-up
vermouth, we’d grab a drum of cable and start to reel it out, so that by the next
day it would get wet and become useless. And, so, then, each to each his own, for
each has his own ideals. And so everything would start over again.
When I became foreman, I took this schedule to its logical conclusion. Now we
did it this way: one day we’d play blackjack the next we’d drink vermouth, on the
third day, again blackjack, the fourth, vermouth again. And our intellectual, he
disappeared altogether at Sheremetievo International – he just stayed there
drinking cognac. We didn’t so much as touch a cable drum, and if I’d even
suggested touching one, the others would have started laughing like the gods,
and then they would have beaten me face in with their fists, and then they would
have gone their separate ways, playing blackjack for money, drinking vermouth,
or drinking Freshen-up.
And until the end came, everything went splendidly. Once a month we’d send
them our commemorative work projections and twice a month they’d send us our
wages. We’d write, for instance, “On the occasion of the upcoming Lenin
Centennial we shall attain a part-time study rate in higher education of one out of
every six workers.” But what were work-related injuries and night school to us, if,
because of blackjack, we didn’t even get outside and there were altogether only
five of us?
Oh, freedom and equality! Oh, brotherhood, oh, life on the dole! Oh, the
sweetness of unaccountability, oh, that most blessed of times in the life of my
people, the time from the opening until the closing of my liquor stores.
Having discarded shame and cares for the future, we lived an exclusively
spiritual life. I broadened their horizons as much as I was able, and they liked it
when I did so, especially in matters concerning Israel and the Arabs. Here, they
were in complete ecstasy, in ecstasy over Israel, in particular. And they couldn’t
stop talking about Golda Meir and King Farouk, whom I had mentioned by way of
historical background. They would come in from whoring in the morning, and one
of them, for instance, would say, “Goldie May-I” and another would answer, with
a self-satisfied grin, “Farouk you!”
And later (listen carefully), later, after they had found out why Pushkin died, I
gave them Alexander Blok’s poem “The Nightingale Garden” to read. There, at the
center of the poem – if you throw out all of the perfumed shoulders, the



unilluminated mists, the rosy towers in smoky vestments – there at the center of
the poem you find the lyric hero dismissed from work for drunkenness, whoring,
and absenteeism. I told them, “It’s a very contemporary book.” I told them,
“You’ll find it useful.” And so? They read it. But, in spite of everything, it had a
depressing effect on them – Freshen-up disappeared immediately from all the
stores. It’s impossible to say why, but blackjack was forgotten, vermouth was
forgotten, Sheremetievo International Field was forgotten, and Freshen-up
triumphed. Everyone drank only Freshen-up. They drank up all the Freshen-up
from Dolgoprudny Station to Sheremetievo International.
And then, suddenly, it dawned on me: “Venichka, what a blockhead you are,
you’re an out-and-out fool. Remember, you read in some man of wisdom that the
Lord God only looks after the fate of the people. Well, you’re the foreman and,
therefore, a “little prince.” Where is your concern for the fate of the people?
Have you looked into the souls of those parasites, into their dark reaches? Are
you familiar with the dialectic of the hearts of these four shitasses? You would do
better to understand what ‘The Nightingale Garden’ and Freshen-up have in
common and why ‘The Nightingale Garden’ is incompatible with both blackjack
and vermouth, while Golda Meir and King Farouk are quite compatible with
them.”
And so it was then I introduced my notorious individualized charts for which I
was finally sacked.

NOVOGIREEVO – REUTOVO
Shall I tell you what kind of individualized charts they were? Now, that’s simple:
on white vellum in black India ink I drew two axes, one horizontal, the other
vertical. All the workdays of the previous month were indicated sequentially on
the horizontal axis, the amount of alcohol consumed – calculated on the basis of
degree of proof – on the vertical axis. Of course, only whatever was consumed on
the job or before was tabulated, since the amount, and was, therefore, of little
interest to a serious researcher.
Thus at the end of the month the worker came to me with his report: onsuch
and such a day, such and such an amount of such and such consumed, on another
day so much of whatever. While I would illustrate all of that with a beautiful



graph in black India ink on white vellum. Here, for you to admire, for instance, is
the chart for Viktor Totoshkin, member of the Komosomol:
*****************************************************
And this is Aleksei Blindiaev, member of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union since 1936, a seedy old dork:
*****************************************************
And here we have your faithful servant, ex-head cable-fitter and author of the
poem Moscow to the End of the Line:
*****************************************************
Aren’t these truly interesting graphs? Interesting even to the most superficial
eye? They looked variously like the Himalayas, the Tyrol, oil derricks, or even the
Kremlin wall, which, admittedly, I have never seen.
Another one looked like a morning breeze on the Kama River, a gentle splash
with rippling beads of lantern light. Still someone else’s was like the beating of a
proud heart, the song of the stormy petrel – in other words, pure Gorky – of like
Aivazovsky’s trashy painting of the ninth wave. And all this, only looking at the
external form of the line.
But, for anyone inquisitive (me, for instance), the lines blurted out everything
that was possible to blurt out about the man and the heart of the man – all his
qualities, from sexuality to practical matters as well as all his faults, both sexual
and practical. Also, the degree of steadiness of temperament and of the tendency
to treachery plus all his unconscious secrets, if he had any unconscious secrets.
I then examined with care, intently and close up, the soul of every shitass. But I
didn’t examine them for long – one fateful day all the charts disappeared from my
desk. It seems that, on the same day, the old fogy Aleksei Blindiaev, member of
the CPSU since 1936, sent off to the Administrative Section our obligatory holiday
projection, in which we all swore, on the occasion of the upcoming Centennial, to
be the same in our everyday life as at work. And, perhaps out of foolishness or
perhaps drunkenness, he put my individualized charts into the same envelope.
As soon as I noticed them missing, I had a drink and grabbed my head. At the
Administrative Section, also, they got the package, grabbed their heads, had
drinks, and, the same day, drove into our district in their Moskvich. What ded



they uncover, bursting into our office? The uncovered nothing, expect Lekha and
Stasik – Lekha was dozing on the floor rolled up in a ball, and Stasik was puking. In
a quarter of an hour everything was decided. My star, which had blazed forth for
four weeks, passed from view. The crucifixion took place exactly thirty days after
the ascension. There was but one month separating my Toulon from me Helene.
To put it that broken-down old dolt Aleksei Blindiaev, member CPSU, 1936. And,
immediately after his designation, he got up from the floor and asked for a oneruble note, which they did not give him. They drank some red wine, got back in
their Moskvich, and went back where they came from.
And so I solemnly announce that, till the end of my days, I shall not undertake
anything the like of my sad brush with eminence. I’ll remain below and from
below I’ll spit on their social ladder. Right, spit on every rung of it. In order to
climb it, it’s necessary to be forged steel-assed from head to toe. And this I’m not.
Anyway, they fired me. Me, the thoughtful prince, the analyst lovingly
inspecting the souls of his people – me, who was considered, at the bottom, a fink
and a collaborator and, at the top, a good-for-nothing with an unstable mind.
The lower strata did not wish to see me, and the higher-ups couldn’t speak of
me without laughing. “The top strata could not and the lower did not want to,” as
Lenin might have put it. What does this betoken, connoisseurs of the philosophy
of history? Absolutely right – next payday, I’ll get the shit beaten out of me,
according to the laws of good and beauty, next payday being the day after
tomorrow, which means that by the day after tomorrow they’ll be kicking my ass
around.
Whew!
“Who said ‘Whew?’ Is that you who said ‘Whew,’ angels?”
Yes, it was us. Whew, Venya, what language.
“So judge for yourselves, how could I help it? This whole mundane nonsense
has gotten me so broken up that, since that very day, I haven’t dried out. Before
that I can’t say I was especially dried out, butat leasy I used to remember what I
drank and in what order. Now I can’t even recollect that. Everything is ups and
downs, everything in life is somehow up and down. First I don’t drink for a week
straight, then I drink for forty days, then again I don’t drink for four days, and then
I drink again for six months without a breather. Take now…”



We understand, we understand everything. They insulted you, you and your
beautiful heart.
Yes, yes, on that day me beautiful heart struggled for a whole half hour with
reason. As in the tragedies of the poet laureate Pierre Corneilli, duty struggles
with the heart’s desire. But with me it was the reverse –the heart’s desire
struggled with reason and duty. The heart said to me, “They’ve insulted you,
they’ve dragged you through shit. Go on and get drunk, Venichka, go on and get
drunk as a skunk.” This is what me beautiful heart said. But my reason? It
grumbled and insisted, “You won’t get up, Erofeev, you won’t go anywhere and
you won’t drink a drop.” While my heart responded, “Well, OK, Venichka, OK. You
don’t have to get drunk a lot. You don’t have to get drunk as a skunk – drink 400
grams and let it go at that.”
“No grams at all,” reason enunciated. “If you can’t get along without anything, go
on and drink three mugs of beer, Erofeev, and forget about the hard stuff.” But
my heart whimpered, “Maybe just 200 grams. Maybe…

REUTOVO – NIKOLSKOE
...maybe just 150.” And reason then: “Well, all right, Venya,” it said, “all right,
drink 150, only don’t go out anywhere, stay home.”
What do you think? Did I drink 150 and sit at home? Ha, ha. Since then I’ve
drunk one and a half liters every day in order to sit home and all the same I don’t
sit home. Because on the sixth day I was so soused that the boundary between
reason and heart had disappeared and they both recited in one voice: “Go, go to
Petushki. In Petushki you’ll find your salvation and your joy, go.”
Petushki is the place where the birds never cease singing, not by day or by
night, where winter and summer the jasmine never cease blooming. Perhaps
there is such a thing as original sin, but no one ever feels burdened in Petushki.
There, even those who don’t dry out for weeks have a bottomless, clear look in
their eyes.
There, every Friday, exactly at eleven o’clock, I’m met on the platform by that
girl of the white eyes, white to off-white, that most beloved of trollops, that redhaired she-devil. And today is Friday. In less than two hours from now – exactly at



eleven o’clock – she’ll be there, with that whitish gaze in which there is no
conscience and no shame. Come with me, oh, what things you will see…
“…And what did I leave behind, there, where I’m coming from? A pair of
scraggly socks and work pants, pliers and a rasp, wages on account and overhead
expenses – that’s what I left behind. And what lies ahead? What waits on the
platform in Petushki? Red lashes, downcast and heaving shapes and a braid from
head to tail. And after the platform, Trapper’s vodka and port wine, bliss and
writhing, ecstasy and convulsions. Oh Heavenly Queen, how far is it to Petushki?
“And there beyond Petushki where the sky and the earth merge and the shewolf howls at the stars, in a smoky, louse-infested mansion unknown to the
whitish little ones. He knows the letter Ю and expects some nuts from me for
that. How many of you knew the letter Ю at three years? Not one. But he knows
and doesn’t expect any reward but a cupful of nuts.
“Pray for me, angels. Let my path be bright, let there be no stumbling block, let
me see the city I have longed to see. And meanwhile – you forgive me –
meanwhile look after my suitcase. I’m going away for ten minutes. I have to drink
some Kubanskaya so that inspiration doesn’t leave me.”
And so I got up again and went down the car to the vestibule.
And I drank not as I did near Karacharovo, no, now I drank without nausea and
without a sandwich, straight from the bottle, throwing back my head like a
pianist, conscious both of the grandeur of the fact that it was just beginning and
of what lay ahead.

NIKOLSKOE – SALTYKOVSKAYA
“These thirteen swallows will bring you no joy,” thought, taking the thirteenth.
“You know yourself that if you drink it from the bottle the second morning
dose beclouds the soul, even if it isn’t for long – only up to the third dose taken
from a glass – but all the same it beclouds the soul. Don’t you know that?”
“So, let it. Let your future be bright. Let your tomorrow be even brighter. But
why do the angels become troubled just as soon as you start talking about the
joys of the Petushki platform and after?”



“Do they think that nobody is waiting for me there? Or that the train will be
derailed, or that ticket inspectors will put me off in Kupavna? Or that somewhere
around kilometer 105 I’ll get sleepy from the wine and doze off and be strangled
like a young boy or cut up like a little girl? Why are the angels troubled? Why have
they fallen silent? My tomorrow is bright. Our tomorrow is brighter than our
yesterday and our today. But who’ll see to it that our day after tomorrow won’t
be worse than our day before yesterday?”
“Right, right. You put that well, Venichka. Our tomorrow and so on. That was
nicely put and clever besides. But, in general, you don’t have many brains. Don’t
you know yourself? Be at peace, Venichka, if only because mind for, if you’ve got
a conscience and, even more than that, taste? Conscience and taste – that’s more
than enough, making brains downright superfluous.
“When did you first notice that you’re a fool, Venichka?”
“Here’s when. When I was reproached at one and the same time for two things
in polar opposition – for being both boring and frivolous. Because if someone is
intelligent and boring he doesn’t descend to frivolity. But if he is frivolous and
intelligent, he won’t permit himself to be boring. Me, I’m marshmallow who
manages to be both.
“And should I tell why? Because I am sick in my soul, though I don’t look it.
Because, since that time, as I remember my condition, I do nothing but simulate
mental health, expending everything, without a scrap left over, all powers,
mental, physical, whatever. This is what makes me boring. Everything that you
speak of, everything that occupies me, I’ll not say a word about. Maybe from fear
I’ll be taken for crazy, maybe from something else, but –all the same – not a word.
“I remember that, already a long time ago, when I would hear someone talking
or arguing about some king of nonsense, I would say, ‘Eh, you really want to go
into that nonsense?’ And people would be amazed at that and say, ‘In what way is
this nonsense anyway? If this is nonsense, then what isn’t?’ And I’d say, ‘Oh, I
don’t know, I don’t know. But some things aren’t.’
“And I look, and I see, and for that reason, I’m sorrowful. And I don’t believe
that any one of you has dragged around within himself this bitter, bitter mishmash. I’m in a quandary over saying what this mishmash is composed of, and, all
the same, you would never understand, but mostly there’s ‘sorrow’ and ‘fear’ in
it. ‘Sorrow’ and ‘fear’ most of all and, then, muteness. And every day, the first



thing in the morning, my ‘beautiful heart’ exudes this infusion and bathes in it till
night. I know this happens with others if somebody dies suddenly, if the most
important being on earth dies suddenly. But with me this is an eternal condition.
At least understand this.
“How am I not to be boring and how am I not to drink Kubanskaya? I’ve earned
the right. I know better than you that ‘world sorrow’ is not a fiction perpetrated
by the old writers, because I carry it within myself and know what it is and I do
not wish to hide this fact. One must get used to speaking of one’s virtues bravely,
to people’s faces. Who is to know, if not we ourselves, to what degree we are
good?
“For instance, do you know Kramskoy’s painting, Inconsolable Grief? Well, of
course you’ve seen it. Imagine that some cat or other has just knocked on the
floor some kind of, oh, phial of Serves porcelain belonging to the grief-stricken
princess or young noblewoman, or that it has torn into shreds some priceless
peignoir or other. Would she be storming around, or flailing about with her
hands? Of course not, because all that would have been nonsense to her, because
for a day or three, she is ‘more elevated’ than any kind of peignoir or cat or Sevres
porcelain.
“So how is it? Is this princess boring? She is impossibly boring, that’s certain. Is
she frivolous? In the highest degree.
“Just like me. Now you know why I’m the saddest of sots, a lightweight among
idiots and gloomier than any shitass? Why I’m a fool, a demon, and a bag of wind
all at the same time?
“It’s great that you’ve understood it all. Let’s drink to understanding with
what’s left of the Kubanskaya, right from the bottle, and let’s drink it straight
down.
“This is how it’s done…”

SALTYKOVSKAYA – KUCHINO
The rest of the Kubanskaya was still seething somewhere not far from me throat,
so when the words Why did you drink it all, Venya? That’s too much came from
heaven, I was hardly able to breathe out in response: “In the whole world… in the



whole world all the way from Moscow to Petushki there has never been anything
like ‘too much’ for me… And why are you fearful for me, heavenly angels?”
We fear that you’re going…
“That I’m going to start swearing again? Oh, no, no, I simply didn’t know that
you were with me constantly or I wouldn’t have before, either… Minute by
minute I’m getting happier and if I start to get foul-mouthed, it’s only because I’m
happy. How silly you are.”
No, we’re not silly, we are only afraid that once again you won’t get there.
“Won’t get where? I won’t get to Petushki? To her? To my shameless Tsaritsa
with eyes like clouds? You’re really funny.”
“What do you mean? While I live… what do you mean? Last Friday, it’s true,
she wouldn’t let me go to see him. Last Friday I went limp, angels, I took to staring
at her white belly, round like the sky and the earth. But, today, I’ll get there, if
only I don’t croak… killed by fate… today I’ll be with her and I’ll graze among the
lilies till morning. But, tomorrow…”
The poor kid, the angels sighed.
“ ’Poor kid?’ Why ‘poor’? Tell me, angels, you’ll be with me right up to
Petushki? You won’t fly off?”
Oh, no, we can’t ride as far as Petushki. We’ll be flying off as soon as you smile.
You haven’t smiled once today. As soon as you smile for the first time, we’re off.
“And there on the platform, you’ll meet me, right?”
Yes, we’ll meet you there.
“You’re lovely creatures, angels. Only why that ‘poor kid’? He’s not a poor kid
at all, the little one who knows the letter Ю like his own five fingers, the little one
who loves his father as himself.
“OK, suppose he was sick the Friday before last and everyone there was afraid
for him. But then, he got better, as soon as he saw me… Yes, yes… Gracious God,
make it so that nothing has happened to him and so that nothing ever will.
“Make it, Lord, so that even if he has fallen from the roof or the stove he won’t
have broken either his arm or his leg. If he happens to see a knife or a razor, let



him not play with them, Lord, please find other playthings for him, Lord. When his
mother stokes the fire, which he loves to watch, drag him off to one side, if you
can, Lord. It pains me to think that he might get burned. And if he should get sick,
let him start getting better the minute he sees me.”
Yes, when I arrived the last time, they told me he was asleep; he was sick and
had a fever. I drank lemon vodka by his crib and they left me alone with him. He
really did have a fever – even the dimple on his cheek was all warm, and it was
curious that such a little nothing could have a fever.
I drank three glasses of lemon vodka before he woke up and looked at me and
my fourth glass, which I had in my hand. I talked with him for a long time, and
said:
“You know what, kid? Don’t die… think about it (after all you can already draw
letters, so you can think for yourself). It’s foolish to die, knowing only the letter Ю
and nothing else… You understand that it’s foolish?”
“I understand, Father…”
The way he said that. Everything they say – the eternally living angels and
eternally dying children – is so important that I feel I should write down the words
in flowing longhand, but I would write everything we say in tiny letters, because
what we say is more or less nonsense. “I understand, Father.”
“You’ll get up again, kid, and dance around again to my ‘Little Piggies’
Farandole.’ Do you remember? When you were two years old you danced to it.
Music by father, and words, too. ‘They’re such little dears, such funny little
devilkins, they snatched and scratched and bit my tummy.’ And you danced like a
tiny fool, one hand on your waist and waving a handkerchief in the other. ‘Since
Feb-ru-ary I whimpered and whined, and toward the end of August I turned up
my toes.’ Do you love your father, kid?”
“Very much.”
“There, see, don’t die. When you’ve not died and you get better, you’ll dance
something for me again. Only, we won’t dance the farandole. It’s got words that
don’t fit. ‘Toward the end of August I turned up my toes.’ That doesn’t work.
‘One, two, three, lay me down to sleep would be much better.”
I finished my fourth glass, and got upset:



“When you’re not around, kid, I’m entirely alone. You understand? You played
in the woods this summer, right? And, probably, you remember the pines there?
That’s me, like a pine tree. It’s very, very tall and very, very lonely, that’s me too.
It’s like me, looking only into the sky, and whatever is underneath it doesn’t see
and doesn’t want to see. It’s green and will always be green until it tumbles down.
That’s me, too. Until I tumble down, I’ll always be green.”
“Green,” the little one responded.
“Take the dandelion, for instance. It sways in the wind and scatters, and it’s sad
to look at it. That’s me, too. I scatter in the wind. Isn’t it disgusting to see how I
scatter in the wind for days on end?”
“Disgusting,” the little one repeated after me, and smiled blissfully.
Even now I remember his “disgusting” and I smile, also blissfully. And I see the
angels nod at me from afar and fly away as they had promised.

KUCHINO – ZHELEZNODOROZHNAYA
But, first of all, I’ll see her. First of all. To see her on the platform with her braid
from head to tail, to blush and to burn and to get drunk lying on my back, and to
graze among the lilies so that I die from sheer exhaustion.
Bring bracelets and necklaces,
I want to dress up like a queen,
Silk and velvet, pearls and diamonds,
For my king has come back to me.
This girl more than a girl. She’s a temptress, she’s a ballad in A flat major. This
woman, this red-haired bitch, she’s a witch. You ask, “But, Venichka, where did
you dig her up and where did she come from, this red-haired bitch? How can
there be anything worth-while in Petushki?”
“There can be,” I say to you, and I’ll say it so loud that Moscow and Petushki
will tremble. Moscow, no, that couldn’t happen with Moscow, but with Petushki it
could. And what it she is a bitch? If you want to know where I dug her up, if you’re
interested, just listen, since you’re so shameless, I’ll tell you the whole story.



“As I told you before, in Petushki the jasmine never stops blooming and the
birds always sing, so, exactly ten weeks ago today, the birds were singing and the
jasmine was blooming. And it was also the birthday of someone or other. In
addition, there was an endless stream of liquor, ten bottles or twelve or twentyfive. And there was anything anyone could wish for, from beer on tap to bottled
stuff.”
“And what else?” you ask, “and what else?”
“There were also two lads. And three young things getting drunk, one girl
drunker than the next and all hell breaking loose. So I mixed some Rossiiskaya
with Zhiguli beer and drank it and looked at the three of them and perceived
something in them. Exactly what, I can’t say so I mixed up another drink and the
more I perceived of that ‘something’ the more I mixed and drank and therefore
the more sharply I perceived it.
“But a responding perception I felt only in one of them. Oh, the red lashes,
longer than the hair on your heads. Oh, the innocent whites of her eyes. Oh, that
whiteness. Oh, the bewitching, dove-like wings…”
“Is that you, Erofeev?” she leaned toward me slightly, blinking her lashes.
“Well, sure. Nobody but me.”
(Oh, the intuitive creature, how did she guess?)
“I’ve read some of your stuff, and, you know, I never thought that anyone
could get so much drivel onto half a hundred pages. It’s beyond Imagination.”
Beyond, come on!” Flattered, I mixed up another drink. “If you like, I’ll do
better, I’ll get even more in next time.”
And that’s how it all got started. That’s how oblivion began – a three-hour gap.
What did I drink? What did I talk about? In what proportions did I mix up my
drinks? Perhaps there wouldn’t have been any gap if I hadn’t mixed my drinks.
But no matter what, I came to after three hours, and this is the position I was in
when I came to – sitting at the table mixing a drink.
And the two of us were alone, she next to me, laughing at me like a child of
paradise. I thought, “Unheard of. This is a woman whose bosom, to this day, has
been seized only by presentiment. This is a woman who, until me, no one has so
much as felt the pulse of. Oh, that blissful itch in the soul and all over.”



And she got up and drank 100 more grams. She drank standing up with her
head tossed back like a pianist. And, having drunk, she breathed out everything
from inside her, everything that was holy in her, everything. And then she arched
her back like an elegant bitch and started to make wild movements with her hips
with such suppleness that I couldn’t look at her without shuddering.
Of course you’ll ask (you’ve no conscience so you’ll ask), “So what, then,
Venichka? Did she?” What can I say? “Well, of course, she…” “Not much, she
sure… She said straight out, ‘I want you to embrace me masterfully with your
right hand.’ Ha, ha. ‘Masterfully’ and ‘with your right hand!’ I whohad gotten to
the point where I couldn’t even touch her torso – I wanted to but I couldn’t find it,
much less embrace her masterfully.
“’Oh, move your sloping sides,’ I thought, mixing a drink. ‘Move, enchantress.
Move, Cleopatra, move your splendid body, whore leaving the poet’s heart
weary. All that I have, I fling today upon the white altar of Aphrodite.’”
This is what I was thinking. But she laughed and went up to the table and
gulped down another 150 grams, for she was perfection and perfection knows no
bounds.

ZHELEZNODOROZHNAYA – CHERNOE
She gulped it down and threw off her dress. “If,” I thought, “if after that she takes
off the rest, the earth will shudder and the stones will sing.”
But she said, “Well, now, Venichka, is it nice here with me?” And, crushed by
desire, I awaited the fall, gasping for breath. I said to her, “I’ve lived exactly thirty
years in the world… but never before have I seen any place as nice as this.”
What was I to do next? Be tender in an insinuating way or crude in a
captivating way? The devil knows, I never really understood how or when to
approach a drunken girl. Up to this point – should I tell you? – up to this point I
knew little about them, drunken or sober. Of course, I rushed after them in my
thoughts, but the moment I would catch up, my heart would stop in fright. I had
designs but not intentions. Whenever any intentions appeared my designs
disappeared and, though I rushed after them in my heart, my thought stopped in
fright. I was contradictory. On the one hand, I liked it that they had waists, while
we haven’t any waists at all. This awoke in me – how should I put it? – “bliss.” Yes,



it awoke a feeling of bliss in me. But, on the other hand, they stabbed Marat with
a penknife, though Marat was incorruptible and shouldn’t have been stabbed.
This thought killed all feelings of bliss. On the other hand, like Karl Marx l liked the
weakness in them, that is, for example, how they are compelled to squat down
when urinating. This pleased me, this filled me with, well, with what? A feeling of
bliss, really? Well, yes, this filled me with a feeling of bliss. But, on the other hand,
didn’t one of them shoot at Lenin? This killed the bliss again – squat away, but
why shoot at Ilich? It would be strange to speak of bliss after that… Now I’ve
gotten distracted.
And so, what was I to do? Be threatening or captivating?
She herself made the choice for me, leaning back and stroking my cheek with
her ankle. There was something like encouragement in this, something like the
blowing of a kiss. And, then, that turbid, bitchy whiteness of her pupils, whiter
than delirium, whiter than seventh heaven. And her stomach that was like the sky
and the earth. As soon as I saw it I all but started to weep from inspiration, to
tremble and steam all over. And everything got mixed together – roses and lilies
and, in little tangles, the whole damp shuddering entrance to Eden and oblivion.
Oh, the moist sobbing of those depths. Oh, the shamelessness of those eyes. Oh,
harlot with eyes like clouds. Oh, sweet navel.
Everything got mixed together. And I know that today will be the same, the
same intoxication and the same slaughter.
You’ll say to me, “What do you think, Venichka, that you are the only
slaughterer she’s got?”
“And what is it to me? And to you all the more? Even if she isn’t faithful, let
her. Age and fidelity cause wrinkles, and I don’t want her to have a wrinkled mug.
Let her be unfaithful… not exactly ‘let her,’ of course, but, no matter, let her. You
see, she’s woven all from bliss and aromas. She’s not one to be pawed or beaten…
you’ve got to breathe her in. Once I tried to count all her innermost curves, and I
couldn’t. I counted up to twenty-seven and got so dizzy from faintness that I
drank some Zubrovka and gave up counting.
“But more beautiful than anything are her forearms. Especially when she
moves them, laughing ecstatically, and says, ‘Eh, Erofeev, you sinful shitass.’ Oh,
the she-devil. Is it possible not to breathe in someone like her?”



She could also be venomous, but that was all nonsense, a form of self-defense
and of something feminine – I understand very little about these things. In any
case, when I had gotten to the core of her there was no venom left, just
strawberries and cream. On one Friday, for instance, when I was really warm from
the Zubrovka, I said to her:
“Come on, let’s be together our whole life. I’ll carry you off to Lobnya, clathe
you in purple and linen, and make a little extra working on telephone boxes while
you’ll sit home sniffing something – lilies, let’s say. Come on.”
But silently she made a fig with her hand. Languidly, I drew it to my nostrils,
breathed in, and started to cry:
“But why? Why?”
She made me another fig. I drew it in and frowned and started crying again:
“But why?” I implored. “Answer, why???”
And then she started sobbing and flopped onto my neck:
“Lunatic, madman, you know exactly why.”
And since then almost every Friday the same thing has been repeated – the
tears and the figs. But today, today, something will be decided because today is
our thirteenth Friday. And I’m getting closer and closer to Petushki, Heavenly
Queen…

CHERNOE – KUPAVNA
I pace around in the vestibule, smoking the whole time.
“And you say that you’re lonely and misunderstood? You who have so much in
your soul and beyond it? You who have someone like that in Petushik? And
someone like the one beyond Petushki?… Lonely?”
“No, no, I’m not lonely any more, not misunderstood anymore. For twelve
weeks I’ve been understood. All the past is gone. Why, I remember when I turned
twenty – at that time, I was hopelessly lonely. And my birthday was a despondent
one. Yuri Petrovich and Nina Vasilissvna came, they brought me a bottle of
Stolichnaya and a can of vegetable-stuffed cabbage, and I felt so lonely, so



impossibly lonely, because of those cabbage rolls and the Stolichnaya so that,
against my will, I started to cry.
“And when I turned thirty last fall? The day was dismal, like the day when I
turned twenty. Borya came with some half-intelligent poetess, Vadya and Lida
came, Ledik and Volodya. And they brought me? What? Two bottles of Stlichnaya
and two cans of stuffed tomatoes. And such despair, such torment possessed me
because of those tomatoes that I wanted to cry but now could not.
“Does this mean that in the course of those ten years I had become less lonely?
No, it doesn’t mean that. Does it mean that my soul had become coarsened in
those ten years? And my heart hardened? It doesn’t mean the either –more likely
the opposite. But, all the same, I wanted to cry but couldn’t.
“Why? Very likely I’ll be able to explain that to you, if I can find some kind of
analogy for it from the world of the beautiful. Let’s say, for instance, a quiet
person drinks 750 grams and becomes boisterous and full of joy. If he adds
another 700, will he become even more boisterous and full of joy? No, he’ll quiet
down again. It’ll even seem on the surface that he has sobered up. But does this
mean that he has, in fact? Never happens. He’s just gotten piggishly drunk and is
quiet for that reason.”
It is just the same with me. I did not become less lonely in those thirty years
and my heart did not become calloused – quite the contrary. But if you look at it
on the surface…
No, take now – to live and live. Living is not at all boring. Only Nikolai Gogol
was bored, and King Solomon. If we’ve already lived through thirty years, it’s
necessary to try to live another thirty. “Man is mortal.” That’s my opinion. But if
we’ve already been born, there’s nothing to be done about it, we must live for a
little… “Life is beautiful” – that’s my opinion.
Really, do you know how many mysteries there are in the world, what an abyss
of unstudied mysteries and what an expanse of space there is for those who draw
these mysteries to themselves? Here is the simplest of examples:
What if yesterday you drank, let’s say, 750 grams but in the morning it was
unthinkable to be hung over – work and the like – and only long after midday,
having suffered through six or seven hours, you finally have something to drink in
order to ease your soul? (So, how much do you drink? Well, let’s say, 150.) Why



isn’t your soul any easier? The queasiness which has accompanied you since
morning, because of the 150 grams, has been replaced by a queasiness of a
different category, a shy queasiness. Your cheeks get crimson like a whore’s and
under your eyes such blue appears as if the day before you hadn’t drunk your 750
but had gotten your face kicked around instead. Why?
I’ll tell you why. Because you have fallen victim to your six or seven hours at
work. You have to have the ability to choose your work; there aren’t any bad jobs
or bad professions; one must respect every calling. It’s necessary, just after
waking, to drink something right away, or, no, I’m lying, not “something” but
precisely the same the same thing that you were drinking the day before – and
drink it every forty or forty-five minutes so that toward evening you have drunk
250 grams more than the day before. Then there won’t be any queasiness or
shyness and you will have such a white face it’ll look as though it hasn’t been
kicked around for six months.
So you see how many puzzles there are in nature, how many blank spots
everywhere.
But the empty-headed youth coming up to take our place doesn’t seem to see
what had the mysteries of existence. He lacks vision and initiative, and I doubt
that he – that any of them – have any brains in their heads. What could be more
noble, for example, than experimenting on oneself? At their age I would do this:
on Thursday evening I’d drink, all at one go, three and a half liters of beer and
vodka mixed. I’d drink it and lie down to sleep without getting undressed and
with one thought only – will I wake up on Friday or won’t I?
And, all the same, I wouldn’t wake up on Friday. I’d wake up on Saturday and
not in Moscow either but under the railroad embankment in the Naro-Fominsk
region. And later, I would, with effort, recollect and gather the facts. And having
gathered them, I’d put them together. And having put them together, I would
start again to recreate by straining my memory with the most penetrating
analysis. And, later, I’d go from observation to abstraction; in other words,
thoughtfully I would have a morning-after drink and, finally, find out what had
happened to Friday.
Ever since childhood, since thumb-sucking days, my favorite word has been
“dare,” and, as God is my witness, I took plenty of chances. If you took the
chances I did, you’d either bust your gut or have a stroke. Or, actually, if at your



age you took the chances I did, one fine morning you’d wake up dead. But I woke
up every morning and started taking chances again.
For example: approaching eighteen years of age, I noticed that from the first
shot through the fifth I would ripen, but beginning with the sixth,

KUPAVNA – KILOMETER 33
And on through the ninth, I would go soft. I’d go so soft that on the tenth I would
have to shut my eyes. And what would I think in my naivete? I would think I mut,
by force of will, overcome the queasiness and drink the eleventh; then perhaps a
return to maturity will occur. But, no, nothing. At this point I experienced no
return.
I mulled this puzzle over for three years straight, I mulled it over daily and, all
the same, I’d fall asleep after the tenth.
And actually it turned out to be so simple: if you’ve already drunk the fifth
shot, you must drink the sixth, seventh, eight, and ninth immediately, at one go,
but drink them in an ideal sense – that is, drink them only in your imagination. In
other words you must, by force of will alone, and at one go, not drink numbers
six, seven, eight, and nine.
And having withstood the pause, take off directly on the tenth, just as with the
ninth symphony of Dvorak, which is actually the ninth but conditionally called the
fifth. The same with you – call you sixth your ninth and be sure that now you’ll
reach maturity without hindrance, and do so from the sixth (the ninth) up to and
including the twenty-eighth (the thirty-second). That is, reach maturity to the
point beyond which lie insanity and piggishness.
No, honestly, I despise the generation coming up to take our place. It inspires
repulsion and terror in me. And don’t think Maksim Gorky will sin songs about
them. I don’t say that at their age we dragged around with ourselves a whole load
of that which is holy. Good Lord, no, sacred things touched us lightly, but on the
other hand there were so many things on which we did not spit. But they, they
spit on everything.
Why don’t they take up – here’s what: at their age I would drink, with large
intervals. I’d drink and drink and stop drinking, drink and drink and again stop



drinking. I’ve no right to judge therefore whether morning depression is more
lively if you make it a daily habit, that is, if from age sixteen you drank 450 grams
at seven in the evening. Of course, were my life to start over again, I would try it –
but would they? Would they?
If only that. While how much uncertainty do other spheres of human life
conceal within themselves! Just suppose, for example, that one day you drink
ordinary vodka exclusively. But, the next day, other stuff exclusively. On the first
day, toward midnight, you stop like one possessed. Toward midnight you burn so
that the Ukrainian girls could jump over you as they jump over the bonfire on Ivan
Kupalo Eve. It’s quite clear they will make it over if you’ve drunk ordinary vodka
exclusively.
But if you have drunk only other kinds from morning till night? Then the girls
won’t be jumping over you on Ivan Kupalo Eve. On the contrary, let a girl sit down
on Ivan Kupalo Eve and you won’t be able to jump over her. On the condition, of
course, that you drank only the other stuff all day.
Yes, yes. But how much do experiments in marrow areas tell us? Take, for
example, hiccupping, that is, the study of drunken hiccupping in its mathematical
aspect.
“For goodness’ sake,” They cry from every side. “Really, isn’t there anything
else in the world besides that, isn’t there anything which you could…”
I cry to all sides, “No. No, there is nothing. No, there’s nothing else… I’m no
fool, I know that in this world there is also psychiatry, and extragalactic
astronomy.”
But, really, all that is not for us. All that was thrust on us by Peter the Great and
Dimitri Kipalchich, the Decembrist astronomer, and really our calling is not here at
all, our calling is in an entirely different direction. In the direction where I will take
you if you’re willing. You’ll say, “This calling is vile and false.” But I’ll say to you, I’ll
repeat, “There are no false callings – respect is due everyone who toils.”
And fie on you finally. Better to leave extragalactic astronomy to the Yanks and
psychiatry to the Germans. Let all pigdom like the Spanish go to look at their
corrida, let the scoundrel of an African build his Aswan Dam (all the same the
wind will blow it away), let Italy choke on its idiotic bel canto, let…
But, I repeat, we shall take up hiccupping.



KILOMETER 33 – ELECTROUGLI
In order to begin this investigation it goes without saying that it will be necessary
to induce it an sich (Immanuel Kant’s term meaning “to induce it in yourself) or to
induce it in another, but for your own reason – that is, fur sich, like so: drink
something strong for two large glass. If this is difficult for anyone, he may permit
himself a small bite to eat, something unpretentious: a piece of not-very-fresh
bread, spiced sprats, plain sprats, or sprats in tomato sauce. Then take an hour’s
break. But don’t eat anything and don’t exert yourself.
And you will be convinced – toward the end of the hour it will begin. When you
hiccup the first time, you’ll be astonished by its unexpectedness, then you’ll be
astonished by the inevitability of the second, third, fourth time, etc. But, if you
are no fool, you’ll soon stop being astonished and get to work. Write down on
paper at what intervals your hiccups deign to honor you. In seconds, of course:
Eight, thirteen, seven, three, eighteen.
Try to find here some kind of periodicity, albeit the most approximate; even if
you’re a fool, attempt to deduce any kind of an idiotic formula in order somehow
to predict the length of the next interval, at least. No matter, life will overturn all
your silly moods:
Seventeen, three, four, seventeen, one, twenty, three, four, seven, seven,
seven, eighteen.
They say that the leaders of the world proletariat, Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels, thoroughly studied the schema of social formulae and, on this basis, were
able to foresee much. But here they would be powerless to foresee the least
thing. You have entered, following your own whim, into the sphere of the
inevitable – be at peace and be patient. Life will disgrace both your elementary
and your higher mathematics:
Thirteen, fifteen, four, twelve, four, five, twenty-eight.
Is it not so with every individual’s triumphs and failures, ecstasies and
afflictions – isn’t there the slightest hint of regularity? Is it not thus that the
catastrophes in the life of humanity follow one another in confusion? Law is
higher than us all. The hiccup is higher than any law. And as its onset so
astonished us not long before, so its ending will astonish us, an ending which –
like death – you can neither predict nor stave off:



Twenty-two, fourteen – that’s all, then silence.
And in this silence your heart says to you: It is indiscernible and we are
helpless. We are deprived of freedom of will and are in the power of the arbitrary
which has no name and from which there is escape.
We are mere trembling creatures while it is omnipotent. It – that is, the Right
Hand of God which is raised above us all and before which only cretins and rogues
do not bow their heads. He is incomprehensible and, therefore, He is.
And thus, be perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect.

ELEKTROUGLI – KILOMETER 43
Yes. Drink more, eat less. This is the best method of avoiding self-conceit and
superficial atheism. Take a look at a hiccupping atheist: he is distracted and dark
of visage, he suffers and he is ugly. Turn away from him, spit, and look at me
when I begin to hiccup: a believer in overcoming who is without of rebellion, I
believe in the fact that He is good and that therefore I myself am good.
He is good. He leads me from suffering toward the light. From Moscow toward
Petushki. Through the torments of the Kursk Station. Through the purgation at
Kuchino, through the fancies of Kupavna to the light of Petushki. Durch leidenlicht.
I paced about in the vestibule in even more terrible agitation. And kept on
smoking. And here, a clear thought struck my brain like lightning.
What else am I to drink so that this exultation will not be extinguished? What
am I to drink in Thy name?
Oh, misfortune! I have nothing that would be worthy of Thee. Kubanskaya,
that’s rot. While Rossiiskaya, it’s ridiculous to speak of it in Thy presence. And
stout red at one thirty-seven. God!...
No, if I get to Petushki unharmed today, I’ll make a cocktail which it will be
possible to drink without shame in the presence of God and man, in the presence
of God and man, in the presence of man and in the mane of God. I’ll call it
“Jordan’s Waters” of “The Star of Bethlehem.” If I forget about that in Petushki,
please remind me.



Don’t laugh. I have vast experience in the creation of cocktails. From Moscow
to Petushki people drink these cocktails not knowing the name of their creator.
They drink the “Balsam of Canaan,” they drink the “Tear of a Komsomol Girl” and
it’s right that they should do so. If it is true that we cannot wait to be favored by
nature, we must wrest her favors from her, then it goes without saying that it is
necessary to know exact recipes. If you wish, I’ll give you these recipes. Listen.
To drink vodka, even from the bottle, is nothing other than weariness of spirit,
and vanity. To mix vodka with eau de cologne, there is a certain caprice, but no
pathos whatsoever. But if you drink a glass of “Balsam of Canaan,” there is caprice
and an idea and pathos, and beyond that a hint of the metaphysical.d
Which component of “Balsam of Canaan” do we value above all else? Well, the
methylated spirits, of course. But, after all, the methylated spirits, being only an
object of inspiration, are themselves simply devoid of this inspiration. What is it,
in this case, the miasma which it exudes. In order to set off this miasma, a touch
of fragrance is necessary. For this reason velvet beer or, best of all, Ostankino or
Czech beer, is added in the proportion 1:2, with one part refined furniture polish.
I won’t remind you how to refine furniture polish – any child knows that. For
some reason no one in Russia knows why Pushkin died, but how to refine
furniture polish – that, everyone knows.
In any event, write down the recipe for “Balsam of Canaan” (as one of our hack
writers might have put it, “Life is given to man only one time and it must be lived
so as not to make mistakes in recipes”):
Methylated Spirits

100g.

Velvet Beer

200g.

Refined Furniture Polish

100g.

And so you have before you “Balsam of Canaan.” In plain speech it is called a
Black Fox and the liquid is a blackish brown, of moderate strength and a staunch
aroma that is really not an aroma, but a hymn. A hymn of democratic youth,
because this cocktail fosters vulgarity and dark forces in the drinker. I’ve observed
this many times!... And to stave off the fostering of these dark forces there are
two means. First, not to drink “Balsam of Canaan” and second, to drink in place of
it the cocktail called “The Spirit of Geneva.”



There’s not a drop of nobility in “The Spirit of Geneva,” but it does have
bouquet. You’ll ask, “What is the secret of its bouquet?” I’ll answer you, “I don’t
know what the secret of its bouquet is.” Then you’ll give it some thought and ask,
“So what is the key?” And the key to it lies in the fact that you shouldn’t replace
White Lilac eau de cologne with any other kind, no Jasmine, not Sweetbrier, not
Lily of the Valley. “In the world of components there are no equivalents,” as the
old alchemists said, and they knew what they were talking about. That is, your Lily
of the Valley Silver is not White Lilac even in the moral sense, not to speak of
bouquet.
Lily of the Valley, for example, excites the mind, disturbs the conscience,
strengthens a sense of one’s inalienable rights. While White Lilac, on the other
hand, soothes the conscience and reconciles man to the sore spots of life.
Once I drank a whole phial of Lily of the Valley Silver, sat down, and started
crying. Why was I crying? Because I recalled my Mama, recalled her and couldn’t
forget her. “Mama,” I say. And I cry. And then again, “Mama,” I say, and once
more I cry. Somebody else would have just sat there crying. But me? I grabbed a
phial of Lilac and drank it. And what do you think? My tears dried up. And I was
overcome by idiotic laughter, and as for Mama – I even forgot her name.
Therefore, how ridiculous someone preparing “The Spirit of Geneva” seems if
adds Lily of the Valley Silver to the athlete’s foot remedy! Listen to the exact
recipe:
White Lilac

50g.

Athlete’s Foot Remedy

50g.

Zhiguli Beer

200g.

Alcohol Vanish

150g.

But if someone doesn’t want to tramp the universe to no good purpose, let
him send to the devil both “Balsam of Canaan” and “The Spirit of Geneva.” He had
better sit down at the table and prepare himself some “Tear of a Komsomol Girl.”
Odorous, you’ll find out later. I’ll explain first why it is odorous, you’ll find out
later. I’ll explain first why it is strange.
Somebody drinking just vodka will keep his right mind and a clear head or he’ll
lose them both at once. But in the case of a “Tear” it’s funny – you drink 100



more grams and you’ll be surprised at yourself. Where did all the right mind come
from? And where did your clear head get to?
Even the “Tear”’s recipe itself is fragrant. And from the prepared cocktail, from
its odorousness it is possible to lose consciousness for a moment. I did, for
example.
Lavender Toilet Water

15g.

Verbena

15g.

Herbal Lotion

30g.

Nail Polish

2g.

Mouthwash

150g.

Lemon Soda

150g.

The mixture prepared this way must be stirred for twenty minutes with a sprig
of honeysuckle. Some, it is true, maintain that in case of necessity it is permissible
to substitute dodder for honeysuckle.
But this is both incorrect and criminal. Cut me up left and right, but you won’t
get me to stir it with dodder. The “Tear” I’ll stir with honeysuckle. I simply die
laughing when I see somebody stirring a “Tear” with dodder and not honeysuckle.
But enough of the “Tear”. Now I present to you the last and the best.
“Labor’s crown is its own supreme reward,” as the poet said. In any event, I
present to you the cocktail “Bitches’ Brew,” a beverage which overshadows all
others. This is more than a beverage – it is the music of the spheres. What is the
finer is this (write it down):
Zhiguli Beer

100g.

“Sadko” Shampoo

30g.

Dandruff Treatment

70g.

Athlete’s Foot Remedy

30g.

Small Bug Killer

20g.

The whole thing is steeped for a week in cigar tobacco and served at table.



I have received letters, incidentally, in which idle readers have recommended
one more thing: that the infusion obtained in the above fashion should be run
through a colander, i.e., run it through and go to bed. All these supplements and
corrections come from flabbiness of imagination, from an insufficiency of mental
scope; that’s where these absurd corrections come from.
“Bitches’ Brew” can be served at table and should be drunk with appearance of
the first star, in large gulps. After only two goblets of this cocktail, a person will
become so inspired that it is possible to go up to him for half an hour and,
standing one and a half meters away, spit in his fat face without his saying a thing.

KILOMETER 43 – KHRAPUNOVO
Did you least manage to write down something? In Petushki, I promise to share
with you the secret of “Jordan’s Waters,” if I get there alive, If God is gracious.
But now let us think about what I’m to drink next? What sort of a combination
can I create out of the junk tat’s left in my suitcase? “Aunt Clara’s Kiss?” Maybe. I
won’t be able to squeeze any other kind of kisses out of the thing, except “First
Kiss” and “Aunt Clara’s Kiss.” Should I explain to you what a “Kiss” is? A “Kiss”
means any red wine mixed fifty-fifty with any vodka. Let’s take dry grape plus
pepper vodka or Kubanskaya – that’s a “First Kiss.” A mix of homebrew and port
wine Number Thirty-three – that’s a “Forced Kiss” or, more simply, a “Cold Kiss”
or, more simply, “Lenin’s Lady.” There are quite a few of the various “Kisses.” In
order not to feel like throwing up from all these “Kisses” it is necessary to get
used to them from childhood.
I’ve got Kubanskaya in my suitcase. But no dry grape. Which means that a
“First Kiss” is out of the question for me; I can only dream of one. But I do have
about one and a half quarter bottles of Rossiiskaya and the stout rose at a rub’
thirty-seven. Together they would make us an “Aunt Clara’s Kiss.” I agree with you
– its taste properties are plain and it is nauseating in the highest degree, but
what’s to be done if there isn’t any dry wine? It will simply be necessary to drink
“Aunt Clara’s Kiss.”
I went back into the car in order to mix my junk up into a “Kiss.” Oh, it’s been
so long since I was here last, since I got out at Nikolskoe. As last time, dozens of
eyes ready for anything… slipping out of orbit, my homeland was looking me in



the eye. Before, after the 150 grams of Rossiiskaya, those eyes pleased me. Now,
after the 500 grams of Kubanskaya, I was in love with those eyes, in love like a
madman. I all but lurched into the car, though I went over toward my bench quite
independently and, just in case, smiling slightly.
I went over to it and was dumbstruck. Where is my quarter bottle of
Rossiiskaya, where is the very quarter bottle which, at Hammer & Sickle, I had
finished only half of? Right from Hammer & Sickle it had stood by me suitcase
with almost 100 grams left in it – where is it now?
I looked them all over but no one batted an eyelash. No, I’m positively in love
and I’m crazy. Where did the angels fly off to? They were looking after the
suitcase in my absence – when did they fly off? In the Kupchino region? Right/
That means that it was stolen between Kupchino and Kilometer 43. While I was
sharing with you the ecstasy of my feelings, while I was initiating you into the
secrets of being, I was being deprived of my “Aunt Clara’s Kiss.” In the simplicity
of my soul, I did not once look into the car all that time… But now “enough of
simplicity,” as the dramatist Ostrovsky put it. And finite la comedia. Not all
simplicity is holy. And not every comedy is divine… Enough of fishing in muddy
water, it’s time to be a fisher of men.
But how and whom?
The devil knows in which guise I’ll arrive in Petushki. All the way from Moscow
it was memoirs and philosophical essays, it was all poems in prose, as with Ivan
Turgenev. Now the detective story begins. I took a look inside my suitcase: is
everything there? Everything was there. But where is the 100 grams? And whom
do I accuse?
I glanced to the right – the same pair is still sitting there, the stupid one and
the intelligent one. The stupid one in the quilt jacket has long since gotten tipsy
and fallen asleep. The intelligent one in the worsted overcoat is sitting opposite
him, trying to wake him up. He is going about it as if he were trying to skin the
stupid one alive: he takes him by a button and jerks him as far as he can toward
himself, as if drawing a bowstring, and then lets him go. And the stupid one flies
back and buries himself into the back of the bench like Cupid’s dull arrow into the
heart.
“Tran-scen-den-tal,” I thought. Has he been at it for a long time? No, these two
couldn’t have stolen it. One of them is wearing a quilt jacket, it’s true, and the



other one isn’t sleeping, so in principle either of them could have. But then, one is
sleeping and the other is wearing a worsted overcoat… so neither one could have
stolen it.
I glanced back – no, there’s nothing there which would suggest… Indeed, two
people do suggest something, but not these two. Very strange, this man and
woman. They are sitting on different sides of the car at opposite windows and
obviously are not acquainted. But for all that, they look amazingly similar – he is
wearing a jacket and she is wearing a jacket; he has a brown beret and a black
moustache, she has a brown beret and a black moustache.
I rubbed my eyes and looked back once again. An amazing resemblance, and
each was incessantly looking the other over, angrily. It’s clear they could not have
stolen the 100 grams.
And ahead? I looked ahead.
Ahead, another strange pain: a grandfather and his grandson. The grandson is
two heads taller than his grandfather and feebleminded probably from birth. The
grandfather is two heads shorter but feebleminded, too. Both look me straight in
the eye and lick their lips.
“Suspicious,” I thought. Why is it they’re licking their lips? Everyone else is
looking me in the eye too, but no one else licking his lips. Very suspicious. I
started to look them over as intently as they were looking at me.
No, the grandson is a complete cretin. Even his neck is abnormal; it doesn’t
grow into his torso, it grows out of it, rising toward the back of his head together
with the collarbones. And he breathes idiotically: first he exhales, then he inhales,
when with everyone else it’s the opposite – first inhaling and only then exhaling.
And he looks at me, his eyes gaping and his mouth screwed up.
But the grandfather – he looked at me even more intensely, as if into the
muzzle of a gun. And with such blue, swollen eyes that from both of these eyes
moisture flowed – as from two drowned men – straight onto his boots. And he
was like a man condemned to be shot, with a deathly pallor on his bald head. And
his whole physiognomy was pockmarked as if he had been shot point-blank. In
the middle of his shot face dangled a swollen, bluish nose that swayed like a
victim of hanging.



“Verrry suspicious,” I thought once more. And, rising from my place, I
motioned with my finger for them to come here.
They both jumped up at once and rushed toward me, licking their lips the
while. “This is also suspicious,” I thought. “It seems to me they jumped up even a
little before I motioned to them.”
I invited them to sit down opposite me.
They both sat down, staring intently at my suitcase. The grandson was seated
in a strange way – we all sit on our rear ends, but this one was somehow rolled on
his left rib and seeming to offer one leg me and the other to his grandfather.
“What’s your name, Gramp, and where are you going?”

KHRAPUNOVO – ESINO
“I’m called Mitrich. And this is my grandson, he’s also Mitrich… We’re going to
Orekhovo, to the park, to ride the carousel…”
And the grandson added: “E-e-e-e-e.”
This sound was unusual and so devilishly offensive that I cannot reproduce it
properly. He didn’t speak, but rather squealed, with his left nostril and with great
effort, as if he were raising the left nostril up with the right: “E-e-e-e-e, how fast
we’re traveling to Petushki, the renowned Petushki. E-e-e-e-e, what a drunk of a
grandpa, what a good grandpa.”
“So-o-o-o, you’re going to ride the carousel.”
“The carousel.”
“Or, maybe not the carousel, after all?”
“The carousel,” Mitrich asserted once more in the very same doomed voice,
and moisture went on flowing from his eyes.
“But tell me, Mitrich, what did you do in here while I was out in the vestibule?
While I was sunk in my own thoughts out there, in my own thoughts about my
own feeling for a beloved woman? Hmmm? Tell me…”
Mitrich, not budging, somehow started to fidget.



No-nothing. I simply wanted to eat compote, compote with white bread.”
“Compote with white bread?”
“Compote with white bread.”
“Great. So, I’m standing in the vestibule all sunk in my thoughts about my
feelings. And you, meanwhile, are searching my bench for compote with white
bread. And not finding any compote…”
The grandfather broke down first and burst into tears, and the grandson after
him. His upper lip entirely disappeared, while his lower one dangled down. Both
cried.
“I understand you. Yes. I can understand everything. If I feel like forgiving you…
I’ve got a soul the size of the Trojan horse’s belly; it’ll hold a lot. I forgive
everything… if I feel like understanding, I understand – you just wanted compote
with white bread. But you didn’t find one or the other on my bench. And you
were simply impelled to drink whatever you found there in place of that which
you wanted.”
I crushed them with my evidence. They both covered their faces and rocked
contritely back and forth on the bench in time with my accusations.
“You remind me of a little old man in Petushki. He, too, drank only other
people’s stuff, he drank only stolen stuff. He’d lift a bottle of Triple eau de
cologne from the pharmacy, go into the toilet at the station, and drink it on the
sly. He called this drinking Bruderschaft; he was seriously convinced that this was
drinking Bruderschaft and he died like that, in his delusion. So, what’s up? Didn’t
you decide to drink Bruderchaft?”
They rocked back and forth and cried, and the grandson even started to blink
with grief.
“But enough of tears. If I feel like understanding, I’ll take it all in. I’ve got a
head for indulgence. If you like, I can offer you some more. Each of you has
already had 50 grams. I can give you another 50.”
At that moment, someone came up from behind and said, “I want to drink with
you, too.”



Everyone looked at him at once. It was the man with the black moustache, the
jacket, and the brown beret.
“E-e-e-e-e,” young Mitrich started to squeal, “what a guy, what a tricky guy.”
The man with the black moustache cut him short with a look, and from
beneath his moustache: “I am not tricky in any way. I don’t steal like some. I don’t
steal the essentials of life from strangers. I’ve got my own – here.”
And he set a bottle of Stolichnaya on the bench.
“You won’t refuse some of mine?” he asked me.
I squeezed over to give him a place.
“No, but I’ll have it later. Meanwhile, I’d like my own stuff, ‘Aunt Clara’s Kiss.’”
“Aunt Clara’s?”
“Aunt Clara’s.”
We poured ourselves each his own stuff. Grandad and grandson waited for
theirs – it turns out they were ready for it before I beckoned to them. Grandad
pulled out the empty quarter bottle; I recognized it at once. And grandson pulled
it out from somewhere between his pelvis and his diaphragm.
I poured them out what I had promised and they smiled.
“Bruderschaft, boys.”
“Bruderschaft.”
Everyone drank, throwing back their heads like pianists.
“This train does not stop at Esino. Stops at all points except Esino.”

ESINO – FRIAZEVO
A rustling and smacking of lips started up, as if the pianist, who had been drinking
everything, had now drunk it all up and had then started to play Franz Liszt’s
Rhapsody in C sharp minor.
The first to speak was the man with the black moustache and the jacket. And,
for some reason, he addressed himself only to me:



“I’ve read in Ivan Bunin that red-haired people, if they drink, always get red in
the face.”
“Well, what of it?”
“Whadaya mean ‘what of it’? The last words of Anton Chekhov before he died
were what? You remember? He said, ‘Ich sterbe,’ that is ‘I’m dying.’ And later he
added, ‘Pour me some champagne.’ And only then did he die.”
“So, so?”
“And Friedrich Schiller not only couldn’t die, he couldn’t live, without
champagne. Do you know how he wrote? He’d put his feet in an icy bath, pour
out the champagne, and write. He’d go through one glassful – and a whole act of
a tragedy would be ready. He’d go through five glasses and a whole tragedy in
five acts would be ready.”
“So, so, so… Well, then…”
He cast ideas into me like the triumphant warrior tosses gold pieces, and I was
barely able to pick them up.
“What about Nikolai Gogol?”
“What about him?”
“Whenever he was at the Panaevs he would always ask that they put a special
pink goblet on the table.”
“And did he drink out of the pink goblet?”
“Yes, he drank out of the pink goblet.”
“And what did he drink?”
“Who knows?...”
“Well, what can you drink from a pink goblet? Vodka, naturally.
Both the Mitriches and I followed him with interest while he, the man with the
black moustache, just laughed in anticipation of new triumphs.
“And old Modest Mussorgsky. My good God, do you know how he wrote his
immortal opera Khovanshchina? It’s laughter and grief. Modest Mussorgsky lies
dead drunk in a ditch, and Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov comes by dressed in a



smoking jacket and carrying a bamboo walking stick. Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov
stops, tickles Modest with his walking stick and says, “Get up. Go wash yourself
and sit down and finish your divine opera Khovanshchina!
“And so they sit there – Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov in an armchair, crossing one
leg over the other and with hid top hat in his outstretched hand. While opposite
him sits Modest Mussorgsky all limp, unshaven, hunched over a bench, sweating,
writing down notes. Modest on the bench wants to tie one on – who cares about
notes. But Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, with top hat in his outstretched hand, won’t
let him.
“But as soon as the door closes behind Rimsky-Korsakov, Modest gives up his
immortal opera Khovanshchina, and it’s thump – back into the ditch. And later he
gets up and ties one on again and, again – thump…
“Well-read dev-v-v-il,” old Mitrich interrupted him enraptured.
“Yes, yes. I really love to read. There are so many fine books in the world,” the
man in the jacket continued. “For example, I drink for one month, for another,
and then I read some book or other and how good it seems to me, this book, and
so bad do I seem to myself that I get thoroughly upset that I can’t read, then I give
it up and start drinking. I drink for one month, then another, and then…”
“Wait a minute.” Here it was I who interrupted him “Wait. What about the
Social Democrats?”
“What Social Democrats? Is it only the Social Democrats? All worthwhile
people in Russia, all the necessary people, they all drank, they drank like pigs. But
superfluous, the muddle-headed ones, they didn’t drink. Eugene Onegin, when he
visited the Larins, the only thing he drank was bilberry juice, and that got him the
trots. But Onegin’s honest contemporaries ‘between the Lafite and Cliquot’ were
at that time giving birth to the ‘mutinous science’ and Decembrism… And when
they finally awakened Herzen…”
“Hold it. Go ahead and wake him up, your Herzen,” someone on the right
bellowed suddenly. We gave a start and turned to the right. I was the cupid in the
worsted overcoat. “This Herzen, he was supposed to get off at Khrapunovo, but
he’s still riding, the dog…”
Everyone who could laugh burst out laughing: “Ah, leave him in peace, the
devil, Dick Decembrist.” “Nothing between the ears.” “What’s the difference,



Khrapunovo or Petushki. What if the old boy has taken it into his head to go to
Petushki and you’re throwing him off in Khrapunovo.” Now everyone was getting
imperceptibly and hideously… And me along with them.
I turned to the man in the jacket with the black moustache:
“Let’s suppose they awakened Alexander Herzen. Just what have Democrats
and Khovanshchina got to do with it?”
“Here’s what! The whole thing got started from that rotgut instead of Clinquot
– Democratization got started, the uproar and the Khovanchinas. All your
Ouspenskys, all your Pomialovskys – they couldn’t write a line without a glass. I’ve
read it, I know. They drank desperately. All the honest men of Russia. And why did
they drink? They drank in desperation. They drank because they were honest,
because they were not up to lightening the burden of the people. The people
were suffocating in poverty and ignorance. Read Dmitri Pisarev. He writes the
same thing: ‘The people cannot permit themselves beef, but vodka is cheaper
than beef, so the Russian peasant drinks because of his poverty. They cannot
permit themselves a book, because at the marketplace there is neither Gogol nor
Belinsky – just vodka, both government vodka and other kinds, and from the
barrel, and to take home. Therefore he drinks, because of his ignorance he
drinks.’
“How is one not to give way to despair, how not to write about the muzhik,
how not to want to save him, how not to drink from despair? The Social Democrat
writes books and drinks, he drinks as well as he writes. But the muzhik does not
read and drink, he drinks without reading. Then Ospensky gets up and hangs
himself and Pomialovsky lies down under a bench in a tavern and breathes his last
and Garshin gets up and, dead drunk, throws himself over the railing.”
The man in the black moustache had already gotten up and taken off his beret
and was gesticulating like a madman. Everything he had drunk was stirring him up
and rushing to his head, rushing, everything rushing. The Decembrist in the
worsted overcoat – he have up on his Herzen, sat down closer to us, and turned
his uplifted, dull, damp eyes to the orator.
“You must look at what’s happening! The darkness of ignorance is ever
thickening, and impoverishment is growing. Have you read Marx? Everyone is
drinking more and more. The Social Democrat’s despair grows proportionally,
now it’s not Lafite or Cliquot – they somehow succeeded in awakening Herzen.



But now all thinking Russia, grieving over the muzhik, drinks and never wakes up.
Ring all the bells of London – no one in Russia will raise his head, everyone’s lying
in vomit, and life is hard for everyone.
“And so it is to this day. To this very day. This circle, this vicious circle of
existence, it has me by the balls. I’ve only got to read a good book and I can’t
figure out who drinks for what reasons. The dregs looking up or the bigwigs
looking down. Then, I can’t go on, I drop the book. I drink for a month, for
another, then…”
“Stop,” the Decembrist interrupted him. “Is it really impossible not to drink? To
take oneself in hand and not drink? Take the Privy Counselor Goethe, for
example, he did not drink at all.”
“Didn’t drink? At all?” The man with the black moustache stood up and put on
his beret. “That can’t be.”
“Oh, yes, it can. The man was able to take himself in hand and did not drink a
single gram.”
“You’re speaking of Johann von Goethe?”
“Yes. I’m speaking of Johann von Goethe, who did not drink a single gram.”
“Strange… And what if Friedrich Schiller had served him something? A goblet of
champagne?”
“All the same he wouldn’t have taken it. He would have taken himself in hand
and not taken it. He would have said, ‘I don’t drink a gram.’”
The man with the black moustache was crestfallen and he started to grieve. His
entire system had collapsed in public view, this system he had constructed by an
ardent and brilliant stretching of points. “Help him, Erofeev,” I whispered to
myself, “help the man. Any kind of blather, an allegory, a…”
“So you say that Privy Counselor Goethe did not drink a gram?” I turned to the
Decembrist. “And why didn’t he drink, do you know? What caused him not to
drink? All honest minds drank but he did not? Why? Here we are going to
Petushki and for some reason we stop everywhere except Esino. Why not stop at
Esono too? But we don’t. We barreled through without a stop. And it’s all
because there weren’t any passengers in Esino. They all got on either at
Khrapunovo or Friazevo. Right. They all got on either at Khrapunovo or Friazevo



and got on there. Because, all the same, the train is going to shoot through
without a stop. So this is how Johann von Goethe acted, the old fool. Do you think
he didn’t want to drink? Of course he wanted to. But in order not to kick the
bucket he forced all his characters to drink, instead. Take even his Faust. Who
drinks in it? Everyone does. Faust drinks and gets younger. Siebel drinks and
crawls all over Faust. Mephistopheles doesn’t do anything but drink and treat the
Krauts and sing “The Song of the Flea” to them. You ask, why was this necessary
for Privy Counselor Goethe? And why did he force Werther to put a bullet in his
forehead? Because – and there is proof – he himself was on the verge of suicide,
but in order to shake off the temptation he forced Werther to do it, instead. You
understand? He remained alive but it was as if he had committed suicide. And
now was completely satisfied. This is even worse than real suicide. In this there is
more cowardice and egoism.
“So, that’s how your Privy Counselor drank, the same way he shot himself.
Mephistopheles would take a drink and he’d be OK, the old cur. Faust would pour
himself some more and – the old dork – he wouldn’t be able to see straight. This
old boy Nick worked with me on road construction – he, too, didn’t drink. He was
afraid that he’d drink a little and take off on a spree for a week, or for a month.
But the rest of us, he all but forced us. He’d pour us something, grunt for us, get
happy, the scum, and walk around as if he were in a stupor.
“So that’s it.” The Decembrist and the man with the black moustache looked
me over. The harmonious system was reestablished and, with it, gaiety. With a
broad gesture, the Decembrist dragged a bottle of pepper vodka man with the
black moustache. The man with the black moustache pulled out his Stolichnaya.
Everyone rubbed their hands, agitatedly.
They poured me more than anyone. They also gave old Mitrich something and
they gave a glassful to the young one, who clasped it happily to his left nipple
with his right thigh, tears gushing from both nostrils.
“And so, to the health of Privy Counselor Johann von Goethe?”

FRIAZEVO – KILOMETER 61
“Yes, to the health of Privy Counselor Johann von Goethe.”



As soon as I had finished drinking I felt that I was getting drunk beyond
measure – and all the others, too.
“But… permit me to ask one trifling question,” the man with the black
moustache said through his moustache, and through the sandwich in his
moustache. Again he addressed only me:
“Permit me to ask why it is you have so much sadness in your eyes? How can
you be sad when you have so much knowledge? You’d think you haven’t drunk
anything since morning.”
I was offended. “What do you mean, nothing? And is it really sadness? This is
just bleariness. I’m just a little high.”
“No, no, this bleariness is from sadness! You’re like Goethe. You refute with
your whole appearance a premise of mine, a speculative premise, but one
growing out of experience. Like Goethe you refute everything.”
“And how do I refute everything? With my bleariness?”
“Precisely. With your bleariness. Just listen to the point of my most cherished
premise: When we drink in the evening and don’t drink in the morning, what are
we in the evening and what do we become the next morning? For example, if I
drink, I’m devilishly merry – I have great mobility and I’m turbulent and I can’t
find a place for myself. But the next morning? The next morning I’m not simply
not merry, not simply immobile, no. I am exactly as much gloomier than my
normal self, my sober self, as I was merrier than my usual self the night before. If I
was possessed by Eros the night before, then my morning revulsion to that is
exactly equal to the dreams of the evening before. What do I want to say? Here,
take a look.” And the man with the black moustache depicted this silly theory. He
explained that the horizontal line is the line of normal sober condition, the
everyday line. The highest point of the curve is the moment of falling asleep, the
lowest point, that of awakening with a hangover:
##############
“You see, it’s a pure mirror image. Stupid, stupid nature, she worries about
nothing so zealously as she does about equilibrium. I don’t know whether this
worrying of hers is morally correct, but it is geometric. Look, this curve represents
for us not only the vital spirit of life – even if there’s a reason to be afraid – we’re



fearless and underestimate all values. While in the morning we overestimate all
values and start getting afraid completely without reason.
“If of an evening’s drinking nature has overpaid us, the next morning she
shortchanges us with mathematical accuracy. If you had an urge for the ideal in
the evening, let’s say, your hangover will bring a rush of the anti-rush. There in
two words is my sacred premise.
“It is universal and applicable to everyone. But with you, it’s not like wit other
people, it’s like Goethe.”
I laughed. “Why is it a premise then and not a postulate, if it’s universal?”
And the Decembrist also laughed. “Be it universal, then, how come it’s a
premise?”
“Because it is. Because it does not take woman into account. It does take man
as such into account, but not the ladies. With the appearance of a woman all
mirror images are disrupted. If women weren’t women, then the premise would
not be a premise. The premise is universal so long as there aren’t any women.
With women the premise is no more. In particular if a woman is bad and the
premise is a good one…”
Everyone started talking at once. “And what’s a premise anyway?” “And what’s
a bad woman?” “There aren’t any bad women, only a premise can be bad.”
“I, for example,” the Decembrist said, “I have thirty women, and everyone is as
good as the next, though I haven’t a moustache. While you, let’s say, have a
moustache and only one good one… Even so, I consider thirty of the worst
women to be better than one, even the best kind.”
“What’s the moustache got to do with it? We were talking about women, not
moustaches.”
“About moustaches, too. If it weren’t for moustaches there wouldn’t have
been any talk.”
“The devil knows what drivel you’re blabbing… All the same, I think that one
good one is worth all yours. How do you look at it?” The man with the black
moustache again turned to me. “From the scientific point of view, how do you
look at it?”



I said , “From the scientific point of view, of course, she is. In Petushki, for
example, they give you one bottle of Trapper’s for thirty empties, and if you bring
in…”
“What! One for thirty? Why so many?” The hubbub started up again.
“Nobody else does it differently! Thirty empties at twelve kopeks, that’s 3.60.
And Trapper’s costs 2.62. Any child know that. They still don’t know how Pushkin
died, but that they know. You don’t take any change because there’s a good
woman behind the counter, and you’ve got to humor a good woman.”
“Yeah, what’s so good about her, this woman behind the counter?”
“She’s good in that a bad woman wouldn’t have taken the bottles at all. But
the good one takes bad bottles and gives you a good one. And, therefore, it is
necessary to humor her. Come to think of it, what was woman placed on earth
for?”
They all observed a significant silence. Each thought his own thoughts, or they
all thought the same thing, for all I know.
“But how do you humor her? What did Maksim Gorky say on the Isle of Capri?
‘The measure of any civilization is its way of relating to women.’ Me, too. I go into
the store in Petushki. I’ve got thirty empties with me. I say, ‘Dearie,’ in a voice
which is so sad and so soused. I say, ‘Be so kind, give me a bottle of Trapper’s.’
And really I know that I’m giving away almost a ruble: 3.60 minus 2.62. It’s a pity.
But she looks at me: should I give him the change, the scum, or not? Rather, no,
at this moment I don’t look at her. I look through her and beyond. And what
arises before me meaningless gaze? Capri does. The agaves and the tamarinds,
and underneath them sits Maksim Gorky, hairy feet sticking out of white pants.
And he threatens me with his finger: ‘Don’t take the change! Don’t take the
change!’ I wink at him: ‘Suppose there won’t be anything to put in my mouth?
Well, OK, I’ll get something to drink but what’ll I eat?’
“And he says: ‘It’s nothing, Venichka, you’ll survive. And should you wish to
eat, don’t drink.’ So I go out without the change. I’m angry of course, I think: ‘the
measure of civilization.’ Ah, Maksim Gorky, you maxim of a Gorky, from stupidity
or booze you blathered the like on your Isle of Capri? You’re OK there, you’ll
gorge on your agaves, but what about me?”



They all laughed. And the grandson squealed, “E-e-e-e-e, what agaves, what a
lovely Isle of Crappery…”
“And the bad woman?” said the Decembrist. “Doesn’t it happen that the bad
woman is really necessary too?”
“Of course, of course she is,” I answered him. It happens that a bad woman
sometimes is positively necessary to a good man. Take me, for example: twelve
weeks ago I was in a coffin, I had been in a coffin for four years already, so that I
had already stopped stinking. And they said to her, ‘Look, he’s in a coffin.
Resurrect him, if you can.’ And she walks up to the coffin, if only you had seen
how she walks up to it.”
“We know,” said the Decembrist. “Walks the same as you write and you can’t
write worth shit.”
“Right, right. She walked up to the coffin and she says, ‘Talife cumi,’ which
means, in the translation from the Ancient Kike-ish: ‘I say to you get up and walk.’
And what do you think? I got up and walked. And it’s already three months that
I’ve been walking around, muddled as I am.”
“Muddled from grief,” the man with the black moustache and the little beret
repeated. “And grief is from woman.”
“He’s muddled because he’s been hitting the bottle,” the Decembrist
interrupted him.
“What’s ‘hitting the bottle’ got to do with it, and why’d he ‘hit the bottle’?
Because, let’s suppose a man grieves and goes to a woman. It’s impossible to go
to a woman and not drink. If you do, she’s a bad one. Yes, even if she’s a bad one,
you’ve got to drink. In fact, the worse the woman, the more you’ve got to hit the
bottle.”
“Honestly,” the Decembrist cried, “how marvelous it is that we’re all so
intelligent. We’re just like in Turgenev – everyone sits around arguing about love.
If you will, I’ll tell you something about an exceptional love and about how
necessary bad women can be. Like in Turgenev, let’s everyone tell something.”
“Let’s.”
“Let’s like in Turgenev.”



Even old Mitrich, even he said, “Let’s.”

KILOMETER 61 – KILOMETER 65
The Decembrist started to tell his story first.
“I had a friend, I’ll never forget him. He was always kind of obsessed, but once
nothing else but something like a demon possessed him. He went crazy over –
you know what? Over Olga Erdeli, the renowned Soviet harpist. But it was this
Erdeli he actually went crazy over. And not once in his life did he ever see her, he
only heard on the radio how she strummed the harp and, wouldn’t you know, he
went crazy over her.
“Went crazy and lay around. He didn’t go to work, didn’t study, didn’t smoke,
didn’t drink, didn’t get out of bed, didn’t love the girls and didn’t stick his head
out the window. ‘I’ll take my pleasure with Olga Erdeli,’ he’d say, ‘and only then
will I be resurrected. I’ll get out of bed, I’ll work and study, I’ll drink and smoke
and stick my head out the window.’ And we’d say to him:
“’So why Erdeli in particular? Take Vera Dolova, if you like, in place of Erdeli,
Vera Dulova plays beautifully.’
“But he’d say, ‘Go stuff your Vera Dulava! She’s fit for a coffin, your Vera
Dulova. I wouldn’t sit down next to your Vera Dulova to take a crap!’
“So, we see that the kid is going to boil away completely. About three days
later we go up to him again.
“’How’s it going, still raving about Olga Erdeli? We’ve found some medicine for
you. If you want, we’ll drag in Vera Dulova with a harp string for you tomorrow.’
“’Sure,’ he says, ‘if you want me to strangle her.’
“So what could we do? The kid was simply dying away, we had to save him. I
went off to see Olga Erdeli, wanting to explain to her what was what, but I
couldn’t bring myself to do it. I even wanted to see Vera Dulova, but, no, I
thought, he’ll strangle her like a forget-me-not. I’m walking through Moscow in
the evening and I’m sad; they’re sitting there on their harps, playing, getting fat,
while there’s nothing left of the kid but ruins and ashes.



“And here I meet this hag of a woman, not so very old, but drunk as they come.
‘A ruble, give me a rrrub’e,’ she says. And just then it dawned on me. I gave her a
ruble and explained everything. And she, this crone, turned out to be quicker than
Olga Erdeli and, to make it all the more persuasive, I had her take a balalaika with
her.
“And so, I dragged her off to my friend. We went in; he’s lying down grieving as
usual. I tossed him the balalaika, right from the threshold. And then shoved this
Olga in his face; I let him have it with this Olga. ‘Here she is – Erdeli! If you don’t
believe me, just ask.’
“And in the morning I take a look. The window is open, he had stuck his head
out of it and had started smoking a bit. Then he started working a bit, studying,
drinking… And he became a man like any other. So, you see…”
“Yeah, where’s the love and where’s Turgenev? We all started up, hardly giving
him a chance to finish. “No, go on about love. Have you read Ivan Turgenev? Well,
if you have, tell us about it. Tell us about ‘First Love,’ about Zinochka, the heroine,
about the veil and how they go to it with a whip on your ugly face – so, tell us
about all that.”
“Of course,” I added, “in Turgenev it’s a little bit different, in Turgenev they all
get together around the hearth, in top hats, holding jabots in outstretched hands.
Oh well, OK, even without the hearth we’ve got something to warm up with. And
what do we need with jabots? Even without the jabot we can’t see straight.”
“Of course, of course.”
“If one is to love a la Turgenev, that means to be able to sacrifice everything for
the sake of a chosen creature. To be able to do what is impossible to do while not
loving a la Turgenev. Take you, old buddy [We had started imperceptibly to get
really friendly with each other.] Take you, Decembrist. This friend you told us
about , would you be able to bite off one of his fingers for the sake of a beloved
woman?’’
“Why a finger? What’s a finger got to do with it?” the Decembrist groaned.
“No, no. Listen. So could you, at night, creep into the party office, take off your
pants and drink a whole bottle of ink, then put bottle back, put on your pants and
quietly return home? For the sake of a beloved woman? Could you?



“My God, no, I couldn’t.”
“So, there you are.”
“But I could,” Grandad Mitrich spoke up suddenly. “But I could tell you a little
something.”
“You? What? You’ve probably even never read Ivan Turgenev.”
“Well, so what if I haven’t… My grandson, he’s read everything.”
“Then we’ll give your grandson the floor later. Go on Gramps, tell us about
love?”
“I can imagine,” I thought, “what drivel this’ll be, what unmitigated drivel.” And
I suddenly remembered my boast on the day I met my Tsaritsa: “I’ll put in even
more rubbish next time. Even more.” So, what? Let him talk, this Mitrich with the
runny eyes. We must honor, I repeat, the dark reaches of another’s soul. We must
look into them even if there’s nothing there, even if there’s only trash there. It’s
all one; look and honor it, look and don’t spit on it.
Grandad started to tell his story:

KILOMETER 65 – PAVLOVO-POSAD
“We had a chairman – he was called Lohengrin – really strict and all covered with
boils… and he’d go out every night for a motorboat ride and steer out onto the
river… and squeeze his boils…”
Moisture flowed from Grandad’s eyes. He was excited. Administration office,
lie down on the floor and nobody could get near him, he wouldn’t say a word.
And if you said anything to cross him, he’d face the corner and start crying… he’d
stand there crying and pee on the floor like a kid.”
Suddenly Grandad fell silent. His lips became twisted, his blue nose flared up
and went out. He cried. Cried like a woman, grabbing his head in his hands, his
shoulders trembling and shaking in waves.
“Well, is that all, Mitrich?”



The car shuddered with laughter. Everyone laughed an ugly laugh and a happy
laugh. And the grandson even started tugging at himself from top to bottom so as
not to wet both ankles. The man with the black moustache got angry:
“So where’s Turgenev here? We made a deal: ‘Like in Turgenev!’ But here the
devil knows what’s going on. Somebody covered with boils who pees, to boot!”
“Ah, he probably’s retelling a moving picture,” someone grumbled from the
side. “The moving picture The Chairman.”
And I sat there and understood old Mitrich, understood his tears – he was
simply sorry for everything and everyone, sorry for the chairman because he had
been given such a shameful nickname, and for the wall on which he urinated, and
for the boat and the boils – sorry for everything. First love or ultimate pity, what’s
the difference? God, dying on the cross, preached pity to us, and, not scoffing, did
he preach. Pity and love for the world are one. Love and pity for every womb, and
fro the fruit of every womb.
“Go on, Gramp,” I said to him. “Go on, I’m treating you, you’ve earned it. You
did a good job on love.
“And all of you, let’s drink. To the nobleman from Oryol, Ivan Turgenev, citizen
of la belle France.”
“Let’s. To the nobleman from Oryol…”
Again the same gurgle and the same sound, then again the rustling and
smacking of lips. An encore of the Rhapsody in C sharp minor composed by Franz
Listz.
No one noticed right away that at the door of our coupe (let’s call it a coupe)
there had appeared the figure of a woman with a black moustache in a brown
beret and a jacket. She was completely drunk, inside and out, and her beret had
gotten askew.
“I also want to drink to Turgenev,” she enunciated from her very guts.
The confusion lasted no more than a couple of moments.
“A tantalizing morsel arrives during the meal,” the Decembrist taunted her.
Everybody laughed.
“What’s to laugh at?” Grandad said. “Just another woman, nice, soft…”



“Nice women like that,” the man with the black moustache retorted sadly,
“nice women like that should be shipped to the Crimea and fed to the wolves.”
“But why, why?” I protested, and started fussing about. “Let her sit down. Let
her tell something. You’ve read Turgenev, you’ve read Maksim Gorky, but try and
get any sense out of you…” I sat her down and poured her out a half a glass of
“Aunt Clara’s.”
She drank it and, in place of a thank you, she lifted up the beret from her head:
“Look here, do you see that?” And she showed us all a scar above her ear, and
then was majestically silent, and then extended her glass toward me once more:
“Hit me again, young man, otherwise I’ll faint.”
I poured her another half a glass.

PAVLOVO-POSAD – NAZARIEVO
She drank that one too, rather mechanically. And having drunk it, she opened her
mouth wide and showed everyone: “Do you see, there are four teeth missing?”
“So where are they, these teeth?” “Who knows where they are? I’m an educated
woman but I’m walking around without teeth. He knocked them out for me
because of Pushkin. And when I heard how you’re having such a literary
conversation here, I thought, Go on and join them, have a drink and at the same
time tell how your head was broken and four of your front teeth knocked out
because of Pushkin.”
So she set about telling her story:
“Everything started with Pushkin. They sent us a Komsomol organizer,
Evtushenkin, he was always pinching me and reciting poetry, and once he catches
hold of me by the calves and asks: ‘Has my wondrous gaze tormented thee?’ I say,
‘What if it has?’ But, by the calves again: ‘Has my voice resounded in thy soul?’
then he grabs me in his arms and drags me off somewhere. And when he drags
me out again I go around, days, not myself, repeating over and over: ‘Pushkin…
Evtushenkin… tormented… resounded,’ ‘Resounded… tormented… Evtushenkin…
Pushkin.’ And then again: ‘Pushkin… Evtushenkin…’”
“Get on with it, get on with the front teeth,” the man with the black
moustache cut her short.



“Right away, right away with the teeth. You’ll get your teeth. What next? So
from then on everything went OK, a whole half year I called down God’s ire with
him in the hayloft. And then this Pushkin spoils everything again. I’m just like Joan
of Arc – not made for pasturing the cows and sowing wheat – she up and got her
butt on a horse and galloped into Orleans to seek adventures. Just like me, I get a
little drunk and right away I go up to him: ‘And who’s going to educate your kids
for you? Pushkin, is it?’ And he snarls: ‘And what kids’ve we got? There ain’t any
kids here. What’s Pushkin got to do with it?’ And then I’d answer: ‘When there
are some kids, it’ll be too late to remember Pushkin.’
“And so, every time, I’d only have to get a little drunk. ‘Who’ll educate the
kids?’ I’d say, ‘Pushkin is it?’ and he’d straight away go crazy. ‘Leave, Dariya,’ he
yells. ‘Leave.’ Stop chipping away at a man’s soul.’ I hated him at those times, I
hated him so much that I’d get a headache behind my eyes. And, then, no matter,
I’d love him again, love him so much that at night I’d wake up from it.
“And then somehow I got stinking drunk. I fly up to him and yell: ‘Pushkin will
educate your kids for you? Huh? Pushkin?’
“As soon as he hears ‘Pushkin’ he turns all black and starts to shake: ‘Drink, get
drunk, but don’t mention Pushkin, don’t mention kids. Drink everything, drink my
blood and don’t tempt your Lord God.’ And at this time I was out on sick leave, a
brain concussion and twisted bowels, and It was fall then in the South, and I
started yelling, ‘Leave me, murderer, leave for good. I’ll get along, I’ll sleep
around for a month and throw myself under a train and then I’ll go to a convent
and take the veil. You’ll come to beg forgiveness from me and I’ll come out all in
black, all enchanting, and I’ll make a fig and scratch your eyes out with it! Leave!’
And then I scream: ‘Do you at least love the soul in me? The soul?’ And he shakes
all over and turns black: ‘With my heart,’ he yells, ‘with my heart, yes, with my
heart I love your soul, but, no, I don’t love your soul with my soul!!’
“And wild somehow, like in an opera, he burst out laughing and grabbed me
and broke my skull and left for Vladimir-on-the-Kliazma. Why did he leave? To
whom did he go? All Europe shared my doubts. But a month later he returned.
And at that time I was in a drunken fog and as soon as I saw him, I fell down on
the table, burst out laughing and started rubbing my legs together: ‘Aha,’ I started
screaming, ‘you blew it in Vladimir-on-the-Kliazma, but who’ll educate the kids…’
And he doesn’t say a word, he just comes over and knocks out my four front teeth
and leaves for Rostov-on-the-Don, on Komsomol business.



“I’m ready to faint, boy. Hit me again, light…”
We all died laughing.
“And where is he now, your Evtushenkin?”
“Who knows, where? Either in Siberia or in Central Asia. If he got to Rostov and
is still alive, that means he’s somewhere in Central Asia. But if he didn’t get to
Rostov and died, that means he’s in Siberia.”
“You’re right,” I backed her up, “you won’t die in Central Asia, it’s possible to
live in Central Asia. I’ve not been there myself but this friend of mine, Tikhonov,
has been.
“He says you go along and see a settlement and they burn dried dung in the
stoves, but there’s nothing to drink, though there’s plenty of victuals: yurts and
mullah. That’s what he took for nourishment almost a half a year: yurts and
mullah. And it’s not so bad – he came back all mellow with his eyes bulging.”
“And in Siberia?”
“And in Siberia – no, you’ll die. In general nobody can live in Siberia, only black
people live there. Products are not transported in, there’s nothing to drink, not to
speak of a ‘meal.’ Only once a year from Zhitomir, in the Ukraine, embroidered
towels are brought in and the blacks hang themselves with them.”
“And what sort of blacks?” The Decembrist, who had been on the point of
dozing off, bestirred himself. “What blacks are there in Siberia? Blacks live in the
States, not in Siberia. You’ve been to Siberia, I suppose. But have you been to the
States?”
“I have been. And I didn’t see any kind of blacks there.”
“No blacks? In the States?”
“Yes, in the States. Not one black.”
Everyone had succeeded in getting so numb, and everyone’s head was so
foggy, that there was no room for any kind of perplexity. The woman with the
complicated story and a scar and no teeth was quickly forgotten. And she forgot
herself as well, and all the others forgot themselves.



“Which means you’ve been in the States,” the man with the black moustache
mumbled. “That’s very, very extraordinary. There aren’t any blacks there and
never were any, that I’ll accept… I believe you like a brother… But, tell us, was
there no freedom there either? And freedom thus remains a phantom on that
continent of sorrow, as they write in our newspaper? Tell us.”
“Yes,” I responded, “and freedom thus remains a phantom on that continent of
sorrow, and the people, thus, have become so used to it that they almost don’t
notice. Just think, they don’t have – I walked around a lot and observed them
closely – not in a single grimace or gesture or remark do they have anything like
the awkwardness to which we have become accustomed. On every rotten face
there is as much dignity expressed in a minute as would last us for our whole
great Seven Year Plan. ‘How come?’ I thought, and turned off Manhattan onto
Fifth Avenue and answered my own question: ‘Because of their vile selfsatisfaction – nothing else.’ But where do they get their self-satisfaction?? I frozen
in the middle of the Avenue in order to resolve the thought: ‘In the world of
propagandistic fictions and advertising vagaries, where do they get so much selfsatisfaction?’ I was heading into Harlem and shrugged my shoulders. ‘Where? The
playthings of monopoly’s ideologues, the marionettes of the arms kings, where do
they get such appetite? They gorge five times a day and always with the same
endless dignity – but can a man have a real appetite in the State?’”
“Yes, yes, yes,” old Mitrich nodded his head. “They eat OK there, but we almost
don’t eat at all… all our rice goes to China, all the sugar to Cuba… so what will we
eat?”
“Nothing, Pops, nothing… You’ve already eaten yours, it’s a sin to talk like that.
If you get to the States, remember the main thing: don’t forget your Homeland
and don’t forget its goodness. Maksim Gorky didn’t writ only about the ladies, he
wrote about the Homeland too. You remember what he wrote?”
“What you mean… I remember…” And everything he had drunk could be seen
in his blue eyes. “I remember: ‘I went off farther and farther into the woods with
grandmother’…”
“You mean to say that’s about the Homeland, Mitrich?” the man with the black
moustache slurred angrily. “That’s about grandmother, not the Homeland at all!”
And Mitrich started crying again.



NAZARIEVO – DREZNA
And the man with the black moustache said, “Here you’ve seen a lot and traveled
a lot. Tell us, where do they value the Russia more, on this or the other side of the
Pyrenees?”
“I don’t know about this side. But on the other they don’t value him at all. For
example, I was in Italy. There, there’s no attention paid to the Russian. They only
sing and draw there. One of them, let’s say, gets up and sings. And another,
sitting alongside, draws the first one who’s singing. And a third, sitting off to the
side, sings about the one who’s drawing. And they don’t understand our grief.”
“Ah, the Italians, do they really understand anything?” the man with the black
moustache backed me up.
“Precisely. When I was in Italy, on St. Mark’s day, I wanted to take a look at the
boat races. And how sad they made me. My heart dissolved in tears, though my
lips were silent. But the Italians didn’t understand, they laughed and pointed their
fingers at me. ‘Hey, look, Erofeev is going around fucked up again.’ But really was
I so fucked up? My lips simply were silent.
“Actually there was no reason for me to be in Italy. I only wanted to see three
things: Vesuvius, Herculaneum, and Pompeii. But they said that Vesuvius
disappeared long ago and sent me to Herculaneum. But in Herculaneum they
said, ‘So, what do you need with Herculaneum, you idiot? It’d be better to go to
Pompeii.’ I arrive in Pompeii but they say to me, ‘You’ve had it with Pompeii. Be
off to Herculaneum.’
“With a wave of my hand, I set out for France. I go along and get up to the
Maginot Line and suddenly I decided to return and spend some time at Luigi
Longo’s, I’ll rent a cot from him and read books and stop fiddling around. Better
to rent a cot from Palmiro Togliatti, of course, but he died recently, you know. But
in what way is Luigi Longo worse?
“But I didn’t return after all. I went instead across the Tyrol in the direction of
the Sorbonne. I arrive at the Sorbonne and I say, ‘I want to study for my
bachelor’s.’ But they tell me, ‘If you want to study for your bachelor’s, buddy, you
have something like an inherent phenomenon in you. So what kind of inherent
phenomenon do you have in you?’ What could I say? I say, “Well, what kind of



inherent phenomenon could I have? I’m just a kid, you know.’ ‘From Siberia?’
they ask. ‘From Siberia!’ ‘Well, since you’re from Siberia there could be something
inherent about your psychology. So what’s inherent about your psychology?’ I
thought about it – after all, this isn’t Podunksk, it’s the Sorbonne, you’ve got to
say something intelligent. I thought about it and said, ‘The inherent phenomenon
in me is my self-motivated logos.’ But the Rector of the Sorbonne, while I was
thinking of something intelligent, had sneaked around behind me and – whack –in
the back of the neck; ‘You’re a fool, Erofeev, and no kind of logos. Get!’ he
screams. ‘Get out of our Sorbonne, Erofeev.’ Then for the first time I was sorry
that I hadn’t rented a cot from Luigi Longo.
“What was left for me to do but go to Paris? I arrive. I head for Notre Dame,
I’m going along, and I’m amazed: there’s nothing but brothels on every side. Only
the Eiffel Tower stands there and General de Gaulle is up on it eating chestnuts
and looking in all four directions through binoculars. But what’s the sense of
looking in all four directions if there’s nothing but brothels?
“It’s impossible to walk along a boulevard there. Everbody is scurrying from
brothel to clinic, from clinic and back to brothel. And there’s so much gonorrhea
around that it’s difficult to walk on the Champs-Elysees, there’s so much
gonorrhea around I can hardly move my feet. I see a couple of acquaintances, he
and she, they’re both chewing on chestnuts, and both old. Where did I see them?
In the newspapers? I don’t remember. Presently I recognized them: that was
Louis Aragon and Elsa Triole. ‘It’s interesting,’ the thought slips through my head.
‘From clinic to brothel or from brothel to clinic?’ And I cut myself off, ‘You should
be ashamed. You’re in Paris, not Podunksk. Ask them questions of social
significance, the most agonizing social questions.’
“I catch up to Louis Aragon and open up my heart and say that I despair of
everything, that I have no doubts about anything, that I am dying from internal
contradictions, and much more in that vein, but he only look at me, saluted like
an old veteran, took his Elsa by the arm and walked off. I catch up again and this
time talk not to Louis but to Triole: I say that I’m dying from a lack of impressions
and that I’m overcome by doubts just when I stop despairing, while in moments
of despair I don’t know any doubts… but like an old whore she patted me on the
cheek, took her Aragon by the arm, and walked off.
“Later, of course, I learned from the papers that they weren’t Louis and Elsa at
all; it turns out they were Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, but what’s



the difference to now? I went about Notre Dame and rented a mansard room
there. Mansard, mezzanine, wing, entresol and attic – I’m always getting them
mixed up and don’t see any difference. Briefly, I rented that in which it is possible
to lie down, to write, and to smoke a pipe. I smoked up twelve pipes and sent off
to the Revue de Paris my essay on questions of love.
“And you know yourselves how hard it is to write about love in France.
Because, in France, everything concerned with love has long since been written.
There, everybody knows everything, while we don’t know anything about love.
Show our citizen with average education a crab louse and ask him if it’s an
ordinary one, of course.’ But show him an ordinary one and he loses his head
entirely. But in France, no. There, they may not know how much a bottle of
Trapper’s costs, but if it’s an ordinary louse then it’ll be ordinary to everyone and
nobody will call it a crab.
“In other words, the Revue de Paris returned my essay with the excuse that it
was written in Russian, that only the title was in French. Do you think that I fell
into despair? I smoked thirteen more pipes in my entresol and created a new
essay also dedicated to love. This time it was written in French from beginning to
end. Only the title was Russian (and after Ilich at that): Bitchiness as the Highest
and Final stage of Whoredom. And sent it off to the Revue de Paris.”
“And they returned it to you again?” the man with the black moustache asked,
to indicate that he was participating in the conversation, but as if in his sleep.
“It goes without saying, they returned it. They recognized my language as
brilliant but the basic idea as false. ‘It may be applicable to Russian conditions,’
they said, ‘but not to the French. Bitchiness here,’ they said, ‘is not yet the highest
stage and certainly not the ultimate one. With you, with you Russians, your
whoredom, having reached the limit of bitchiness, will be forcibly abolished and
replaced by onanism in an obligatory program; with us, with us French, although
not excluded in the future, there is an inculcation (in a more voluntary program)
of certain elements of Russian onanism, in a native Sodom into which our
bitchiness, through incest, is being transformed. But this inculcation will proceed
in the course of traditional whoredom and in quite a permanent condition.’
“Briefly, they crapped on my brains completely. So that I spat on it, burned my
manuscripts together with the mansard and the entresol, and took off for the
English Channel through Verdun. Along toward Albion, I went along thinking, ‘All



the same, why didn’t I stay in luigi Longo’s apartment?’ I walked along and sang,
‘The Queen of England is seriously ill, if she lives till tomorrow she’ll be here still!’
But in the outskirts of London…”
“Permit me,” the man with the black moustache interrupted. “Your boldness
astonishes me… no, I believe you like a brother… the ease with which you
overcame all national boundaries astonishes me.”

DREZNA – KILOMETER 85
“So what’s so astonishing about it? And what boundaries, anyway? And what
boundaries, anyway? A boundary is necessary in order not to get nations
confused. With us, for example, a border guard stands there and he knows
absolutely that the boundary isn’t a fiction or an emblem, because on one side of
it people speak Russian and drink more and on the other they speak non-Russian
and drink less.
“But over there what kind of boundaries could exist, if they all drink and speak
non-Russian in the same way? Over there, they might like to set out a border
guard, but there’d be no place to set him. So over there the border guards hang
around without anything to do, grieving and bumming cigarettes. In this sense,
things are completely free. If you want, for example, to stay in Eboli, please, stay
in Eboli. If you want to go to Canosa, nobody’ll interfere with you, go to Canosa. If
you want to cross the Rubicon, go ahead.
“So there’s nothing astonishing about it… At twelve-zero-zero Greenwich time I
had already been introduced to the Director of the British Museum, whose
euphonious and idiotic name was something like Sir Silage Corn. ‘What do you
want from us?’ the Director of the British Museum asked. ‘I want to become
engage here. More likely, I want you to engager me, that’s what I want.’
“’You want me to engager you in those pants?’ said the Director of the British
Museum. ‘What about these pants?’ I asked him with concealed vexation. And he,
as if he hadn’t heard, got in front of me on all fours and started smelling my socks.
Having smelled them, he got up, frowned, spat, and then asked: ‘In those socks,
you want me to engager you?’
“ ‘What about these socks?’ I started to say, not concealing my vexation
anymore. “What about them? Take the socks I dragged around in my Homeland;



they really smelled, yes. But before departure I changed them, because
everything in man ought to be beautiful – his soul and his thoughts and his…’
“But he didn’t even want to listen. Went into the Chamber of Lords and said to
them, ‘Lords, I’ve got a bum here behind the door. He’s from snow-covered
Russia but, it would seem, not terribly drunk. What am I to do with this miserable
wretch, engager him, the scarecrow, or not give the straw man any engagement
at all?’ And the Lords looked me over through their monocles and said, ‘Give it a
try, Si, give it a try. Put him up for review. This dusty bastard would fit in in any
interior.’ Here, the Queen of England took the floor. She raised her hand and
cried…”
“Watch it, Ticket Control!” The cry rang out, exploding through the length of
the train. “Ticket Control!”
My story was interrupted in the most interesting of places. But not only was
my story interrupted: the drunken half-daze that the man with the black
moustache was in, the Decembrist’s sleep – everything was interrupted in
midstream. Old Mitrich came to, all it tears. Only the woman of the complicated
story, who had covered her missing teeth with her beret, slept, like a Fata
Morgana.
Strictly speaking, on the Petushki branch line no one was afraid of ticket
inspectors, since no one ever had a ticket. If some crazy boozer or other broke the
rule and bought a ticket, he would, of course, feel uncomfortable when the
inspectors appeared. He would stare down at his feet as if he wanted to sink into
the ground. And the inspector would look at the ticket squeamishly and give the
man a withering glance as if he were some sort of garbage. While the people
would look with big, beautiful eyes at this character, as if to say, “Look at the
ground, you shitass, your consdience has gotten the better of you.” And they’d
look the inspector in the eye with even more determination: “Take a look at us.
Can you judge us? Come on over here, Semenych, we won’t offend you.”
Before Semenych had become the chief inspector, things were very different.
In those days, riders without tickets were chased onto the reservation like Hindus,
flogged over the head with the Academy Dictionary and then fine and kicked off
the train. In those days, people would race through the cars in droves to dodge an
inspector, dragging along even those with tickets. Once, two small boys were
caught up in the general panic, ran off with the herd, and were crushed to death



before my eyes. They lay as they fell between cars; their little hands, turning blue,
still clutched their tickets.
Chief Inspector Semenych chanded all that. He cancelled all the fines and the
drives to the reservation. He made things simpler; he accepted one gram of vodka
per kilometer from anyone without a ticket. All over Russia drivers take a kopek
per kilometer from hitchhikers, but Semenych was one and a half times cheaper –
one gram per kilometer. If, for instance, you’re going from Chukhlinki to Usad – a
distance of ninety kilometers – you pour out ninety grams for Semenych and off
you go sprawled on your bench like a fat cat.
Thus Semenych’s innovation strengthened the bond between the inspector
and the broad masses; he made this bond cheaper, simpler, and more humane.
And now at the cry, “Ticket Control,” there is no real fear, only anticipation.
Semenych came into the car, smiling carnivorously. He was already hardly able
to stand up. Usually, he rode only to Orekhovo-Zuevo, where he would jump off
and go into his office, having collected enough to get puking drunk.
“Is that you, Mitrich? Going to Orekhovo with your grandson again to ride the
merry-go-round? That’ll be 180 for the two of you. I that you, black moustache?
Saltykovskya to Orekhovo-Zuevo? Seventy-two grams. Wake up that whore and
ask how much is due from her. And you, Worsted Coat, from where to where?
Hammer & Sickle to Pokrov? One hundred and five, be so kind. It’s getting so you
can’t find anyone with a ticket anymore. Once this called for ‘public anger and
outrage’ but now it’s just ‘justified pride.’ And you, Venya?”
And Semenych bathed me with a blood thirsty whiff of his alcoholic breath.
“And you, Venya? Moscow – Petushki, to the end of the line as usual?”

KILOMETER 85 – OREKHOVO-ZUEVO
“Yes, as usual. And it’s for good this time: Moscow – Petushki…”
“And you think you’ll worm your way out of it this time, Scheherazade? Right?”
Here I must make a small digression and, while Semenych is drinking the
dosage that he’s collected in fines, explain to you quickly why “Scheherazade”
and what he meant by “worm your way out of it.”



Three years have passed since I first bumped into Semenych. Then, he had only
just started to work as an inspector. He came up to me and said, “Moscow –
Petushki? One hundred twenty-five.” And, when I didn’t understand what was
what, he explained it to me. And, when I said that I didn’t have a drop with me,
his answer to that was: “Do I have to kick your ass around for you, if you haven’t
got any?” I answered him that it wouldn’t be necessary and muttered something
from the area of Roman law. He became terribly interested and asked me to tell
him in detail about everything ancient and Roman. I started to talk and soon got
to the scandalous tale of Lucretia and Tarquinius, but, at this point, he had to
jump off at Orekhovo-Zuevo. So he didn’t get a chance to find out what finally
happened to Lucretia: did that good-for-nothing Tarquinius attain his end or not…
Now Semenych was an extraordinary ladies’ man and a utopian; the history of
the world interested him only for its intimate moments. So when he looked in
again a week later near Friazevo, Semenych didn’t say to me, “Moscow-Petushki?
One hundred twenty-five.” No, he flung himself on me for the continuation:
“Well, did he fuck his Lucretia or not?”
And I told him what happened next. I went from Roman to Christian history
and came to the story of Hypatia.
“And so, at the instigation of the Patriarch Cyril, the monks of Alexandria,
seized by fanaticism, tore the clothing from the beautiful Hypatia and…” But,
here, our train came to a dead stop in Orekhovo-Zuevo, and Semenych had to
leap onto the platform, hopelessly intrigued.
And in this way three years passed, every week. On the Moscow-Petushki line I
was the only unticketed passenger who had never brought Semenych a single
gram of vodka and, nevertheless, remained unabused and among the living. But
every story has an end – even the story of the world.
The next Friday, I got up to Indira Gandhi, Moshe Dayan, and Dubcek. There
was no place left to go.
And so Semenych drank the fines he had levied, grunted and looked at me like
a boa constrictor.
“Moscow-Petushki? One hundred twenty-five.”
“Semenych,” I responded, almost begging, “Semenych, haven’t you drunk quite
a lot already?”



“A decent amount,” he answered, not without self-satisfaction. He was really
foggy.
“Then that means you’ve got an imagination? That means you’re ready to race
into the future? That means you can come with me out of the dark world of the
past into the golden age which ‘verily, verily, shall be’!”
“I can, Venya, I can. Today, I can do anything.”
“From the Third Reich, the Fifth Republic, from Slaughterhouse Five, the
Seventeenth Congress – can you leap with me into the promised land of the Fifth
Kingdom, the seventh heaven and the Second Coming?”
“I can,” Semenych roared. “Speak, Scheherazade, speak!”
“Then, listen. The day will come, that day of days. On that day when most
weary Simon shall say finally, ‘Now, absolve thy servant, Lord,’ and the archangel
Gabriel shall say, ‘Hail, Mary, blessed art thou amongst women,’ and Doctor Faust
shall pronounce: ‘The moment is now, linger and stop a bit!’ And all whose names
are written in the book of life shall sing out: ‘Exalt Isaiah,’ and Diogenes will
extinguish his lantern. There shall be good and beauty and everything will be fine
and all will be good and other than good and beauty there will be nothing and all
shall merge into a kiss.”
“Merge into a kiss.” Semenych was fidgeting impatiently now.
“Yes! And the torturer and the victim shall merge into a kiss, and spite, design,
and calculation shall disappear from the heart, and the woman –“
“The woman!!” Semenych started to quiver. “What? What about the woman?”
“And the woman of the East shall throw off her veil, the oppressed woman of
the East shall throw off her veil once and for all, and the lamb shall lie down.”
“Lie down?” Here he started to twitch all over.
“Yes. And the lamb shall lie down with the wolf and not one tear shall be shed
and every cavalier shall choose a lady, whoever pleases him, and…”
“Ooooh,” Semenych groaned. “Will she? Will it be soon?” And, suddenly, he
started to wave his hands like a gypsy dancer and then to fumble busily about
with his clothing, stripping off his uniform down to his most intimate parts.



Although drunk, I gazed at him in amazement, while the sober citizens around
him just about leapt from their seats. And in dozens of eyes was written a huge
“Aha!” The people had interpreted the matter quite differently than they ought to
have interpreted it.
I should tell you that homosexuality in our country has been overcome once
and for all but not entirely. Or, entirely but not completely. Or else, entirely and
completely but not once and for all. What do people think about now? Nothing
but homosexuality. That and the Middle East. Israel, the Golan Heights, Moshe
Dayan. So, if they chase Moshe Dayan off the Golan Heights and the Arabs make
peace with the Jews? What will remain in the peoples’ heads? Nothing but
homosexuality pure and simple.
Let’s say they’re watching television: General de Gaulle and Georges Pompidou
meet at a diplomatic function. Naturally they both smile and shake each other’s
hand. And then the audience goes: “Aha.” They say, “Go on, General de Gaulle!”
Or: “Aha, go on, Georges Pompidou!”
Just like they were looking at us now. Everyone had “Aha” written in his round
eyes.
“Semenych! Semenych!” I grabbed him under the arms and started to drag him
toward the vestibule. “People are looking at us. Come to your senses… Let’s go!”
He was terribly heavy. He had gotten all soft and unsteady. I barely got him to
the end of the car and propped up against the automatic doors.
“Venya, tell me… the woman of the East… If she takes off the veil… will she
have anything else on? Does she have anything under the veil?”
I had no time to answer. The train stopped as if transfixed at the station in
Orekhovo-Zuevo, and the doors opened automatically.

OREKHOVO-ZUEVO
Senior Inspector Semenych, intrigued for the one thousand and first time, halfalive and unbuttoned, was propelled out onto the platform, bumping his head on
the railing. He then collapsed under the feet of the people getting off the train,
and all the fines he had collected spewed out of his gullet and flowed away over
the platform.



I saw all of this with complete clarity, and report on it to the world. But all the
rest I didn’t see and cannot report on. At the very edge of my consciousness, I was
aware that the human avalanche which was getting off at Orekhovo overwhelmed
me and sucked at me so as to gather me into itself like a nasty wad to be spit out
on the Orekhovo platform. But without quite spitting, because the people getting
on the train plugged up the mouth of the ones getting off.
And if God should ask me: “Really, Venya, you don’t remember anything else?
Really, did you immediately sink into that sleep with which all your calamities
began?” I’ll say to him, “No, Lord, not immediately. At the very same edge of
consciousness, I was also aware that I was able, finally, to get the better of the
elements and to break through into the empty spaces of the train and to fall onto
somebody’s bench, the one next to the door.
“And when I had fallen onto the bench, Lord, I immediately gave myself over to
the potent flow of dreams and lazy somnolence – oh, no. I’m lying again, I’m again
lying to thy face, Lord. It is not I who lie, it’s my weakened memory. I did not
immediately give myself over to the flow, I groped in my pocket for the stillsealed bottle of Kubanskaya and took five or six sips – and only then, shipping the
oars, did I give myself over to the potent flow of dreams and lazy somnolence.
“All your fancies about the Golden Age,” I repeated over and over, “all are lies
and dejection. But me, twelve weeks ago, I saw its prototype and a half hour from
now its reflection will flash in my eyes for the thirteenth time. There, the birds
never cease singing neither by day nor by night; there, neither winter nor summer
does the jasmine cease blooming, but what’s that in the jasmine? Who is it there,
arrayed in purple and linen, with the downcast eyes, smelling the lilies?”
And I smile like an idiot and pull aside the branches of jasmine.

OREKHOVO-ZUEVO – KRUTOE
And a sleepy Tikhonov emerges from the branches of jasmine, squinting into the
sun.
“What are you doing here, Tikhonov?”
“I’m finishing work on the theses. Everything has long been ready except for
the theses. And now, here, the theses are ready too.”



“Does this mean that you consider that the time is ripe?”
“Who knows? The moment I have a little something to drink, it seems to me
that it is, but the minute I start coming down – no, I think, It’s not yet ripe and it is
still too soon to take up arms.”
“Better drink some Hollands, Vadya.”
Tikhonov drank some Hollands, grunted, and fell to grieving.
“Well, what? Is the time ripe?”
“Wait a minute, it’s getting there.”
“When do we act? Tomorrow?”
“Who knows! The moment I have a little something to drink it seems to me
that even today – that even yesterday – wasn’t too early to act. But the minute I
start coming down, no, I think that yesterday was too early and that the day after
tomorrow won’t be too late.”
“Better drink some more Hollands, Vadimchik, drink some more Hollands.”
Vadimchik took a drink and again fell to grieving.
“Well, what? Do you think it’s time?”
“It is.”
“Don’t forget the password. And tell everyone not to forget: tomorrow
morning halfway between the villages of Garino and Eliseikovo, by the cattle yard,
at nine-zero-zero Greenwich…”
“Right. Nine-zero-zero Greenwich.”
“Goodbye, comrade. Try to get some sleep on this night.”
“I’ll try to get some sleep. Goodbye, comrade.”
Here I must qualify: in the face of the conscience of the whole of mankind I
should say that from the very beginning I opposed this adventure, fruitless as a fig
tree. (Well said, “Fruitless as a fig tree”!) From the very first, I said that revolution
achieves something essential when it occurs in the heart and not in the town
square. But once they began it without me, I could not remain aloof from those
who began it. I would be able, in any case, to avert unnecessary bitterness of



heart and to lessen the amount of bloodshed. Before nine Greenwich, in the grass
next to the cattle yard, we sat and waited. To everyone who came up, we said,
“Sit down with us; take a load off your feet, comrade,” and they all remained
standing, clanked their weapons and repeated the agreed-upon phrase from
Pushkin’s Eugene Onegin: “I love the ladies’ dainty feet.” This password was
playful and ambiguous, but we weren’t up to that – nine-zero-zero Greenwich
was approaching.
With what did it all begin? It all began with Tikhonov nailing his fourteen
theses to the gate of the Eliseikovo Agro-Soviet. Rather he didn’t nail them to the
gate but wrote them on the fence with chalk and they were more like words and
not theses, clear and lapidary words, and there were only two of them and not
fourteen, but, be that as it may, it all began with that.
We moved out in two columns with our standards in our hands. One column
marched without opposition till sunset. No one was killed on any side, no one was
wounded either, only one prisoner was taken – the elderly ex-Chairman of the
Larionovo Agro-Soviet, removed from his post for drunkenness and congenital
imbecility. Eliseikovo was subdued. Cherkasovo lay prostrate at our feet;
Neugodovo and Peksha begged for mercy. All the population centers of the
Petushki district from the store at Poloshy to the Andreevo willage storehouse –
all were occupied by the forces of the rebellion.
And after sunset, the village of Cherkasovo was proclaimed the capital, the
prisoner was brought there, and there, too, a congress of the victors was
improvised. Everyone who delivered a speech was stinking drunk; they all ground
on about one and the same thing: Maximilian, Robespierre, Oliver Cromwell,
Sonya Perovskaya, Vera Zasulich…
Some listeners cried, “And Norway, where is that anyway?” “Who knows
anyhow, where it is!” Others answered them, “Halfway to hell and back.”
“Wherever it is,” I tried to calm them down, “we won’t get anywhere without
intervention. In order to restore the economy destroyed by war, we must first
destroy it, and for that you need a civil war, at least some kind of a war… you
need a minimum of twelve fronts.”
“White Polish forces are needed,” Tikhonov cried, staggering drunk. “Oh,
idiot,” I interrupted him, “you’re always running off at the mouth. You’re a
brilliant theoretician, Vadim; we have nailed your theses to uor hearts, but as



soon as the time comes, you’re pure shit, you fool, what do you need with White
Polish forces?” “So, am I arguing?” Tikhonov started giving in. “As if they’re more
necessary to me than to you! Norway’s OK with me.”
In the heat of the moment everyone somehow had forgotten that Norway had
been a member of NATO for twenty years, and Vladik Ts-sky was already running
to the Larionovo post office with a package of cards and letters. One Letter was
addressed, return receipt, to Olaf, King of Norway, declaring war. Another letter –
rather not even a letter but a blank piece of paper sealed in an envelope – was
sent off to General Franco. Let him see an accusatory finger in that, the old dolt,
let him turn pale as the piece of paper, the fucking Caudillo. From the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, Harold Wilson, we demanded very little: “Get your
gunboat out of the Gulf of Aqaba, Prime Minister, then do as you wish…” And
finally, in a fourth letter to Wladyslaw Gomulka, we wrote: “You, Wladyslaw, have
full and inalienable right to the Polish corridor, while Jozef Cyrankievicz hasn’t the
slightest claim to the Polish Corridor…”
And we sent four postcards: to Abba Eban, Moshe Dayan, General Suharto, and
Alexander Dubcek. All four postcards were quite lovely, with little scenes and
acorn designs. So let the boys enjoy them, the louts; maybe they’ll recognize us as
subjects of international law.
No one slept that night. Everyone was seized by enthusiasm, everyone gazed at
the sky waiting for Norwegian bombs, the opening of the stores, and intervention.
And everyone imagined how happy Wladyslaw Gomulka would be and how Jozef
Cyrankievicz would tear his hair.
The prisoner didn’t sleep either; the ex-Chairman of the Agro-Soviet howled
from his shed like a grieving hound.
“Boys!... Does this mean that tomorrow morning nobody’ll bring me anything
to drink?”
“Hey, whadaya want! Give thanks that at least we’ll feed you in accordance
with the Geneva Convention.”
“What’s that, anyway?”
“You’ll see what it is. That is, you’ll still be able to drag your feet about,
Ivanych, but you won’t be much for sniffing around the ladies.”



KRUTOE – VOINOVO
And a Plenum was in season from dawn until the time the liquor stores opened
up. It was broad-based and revolutionary-spirited, but since all four of our
Plenums in order not to get them mixed up, to number them: First Plenum,
Second Plenum, Third Plenum, and Fourth Plenum.
The entire First Plenum was devoted to electing a President, i.e., to electing me
as President. This took us some two minutes, no more. So all the rest of the time
was eaten up by debate on a purely speculative theme: Who’ll open up the store
earlier – Aunt Masha in Andreevo or Aunty Shura in Polomy?
Sitting on my presidium, I listened to the debate and thought, debate is
absolutely necessary – but decrees are much more necessary. Why are we
forgetting that which should be the crowning labor of any revolution – the issuing
of decrees? For example, a decree obligating Aunty Shura in Polomy to open her
store at six in the morning. Nothing could be simpler: invested with the power,
we undertake to force Aunty Shura to open her store at six in the morning instead
of nine-thirty. Why didn’t this occur to me before?
Or, for example, a decree concerning land: transferring to the people all the
land in the district, all acreage and all movable property, along with all alcoholic
beverages and without any requital? Or this: resetting the hands of the clock two
hours forward or an hour and a half back, or any way whatever. Then demanding
that the word “devil” be spelled with a capital D, or cancelling some letter
altogether – it’s just a question of which one. And, finally, forcing Aunty Masha in
Andreevo to open her store at five-thirty instead of nine.
Thoughts crowded into my head, so much so that I started to feel sad and
called Tikhonov off behind the scenes, where we drank some Caraway vodka and I
said:
“Hey listen, counselor!”
“Well, what?”
“Oh, nothing. You’re a shitty counselor, that’s what.”
“Find another one.” Tikhonov was offended.



“That’s not the point, Vadya. The point is this: if you’re a decent counselor, sit
down and write decrees. Have another little drink, sit down and write. I heard
that you have not restrained yourself after all, that you pinched Anatole Ivanych’s
thigh. What are you up to? You want to start a terror campaign?”
“Oh, what the… Just a little…”
“And what sort of terror are you undertaking? White terror?”
“Yes.”
“It’s in vain, Vadya. However, OK, right now’s not the time. It is necessary to
write a decree first, if only one stinking decree. You have paper and pen? Sit down
and write. And then we’ll have a drink and go on to a declaration of human rights.
And only then comes the terror. And then later we’ll have a drink and, as Ilich put
it, study, study, study.”
Tikhonov wrote two words, had a drink, and sighed:
“Yes-s-s… I muffed it with my terror… Well, really, in our affair it’s impossible
not to make mistakes, because our affair is unheard-of and new, and consider
that there are no precedents, it’s true, but…”
“Aw, what kind of precedents are they? They’re nothing. Nonsense. Than flight
of the bumblebee, the amusement of spoiled grown-ups – not any kind of
precedents… The calendar – what do you think? Should we replace it or leave it as
it is?”
“Oh, better leave it. As they say: don’t poke around in shit or you’ll start
smelling.”
“You put it correctly, we’ll leave it as is. In you I have a brilliant theoretician,
Vadya, and that’s good. Should we close the Plenum or not? Aunty Shura in
Polomy is already open. She has some Rossiiskaya, they say.”
“Close it, of course. Anyway, tomorrow morning the Second Plenum will take
place. Let’s go to Polomy.”
Aunty Shura in Polomy really did have some Rossiiskaya. In connection with
this, as well as in expectation of punitive raids from the Regional Center, it was
decided to move the capital temporarily from Cherkasovo to Polomy – that is,
twelve versts deeper into the territory of the Republic.



And there, on the next morning, the Second Plenum, devoted to the issue of
my resignation from the Presidency, was declared open.
“I am getting up from the President’s chair,” I said. “ I spit in the President’s
chair. I feel that the President’s chair should be occupied by someone who looks
so shot from drink that you couldn’t touch his face with a three-day beating. Do
we actually have anyone like that?” “We don’t,” the delegates answered in
unison. “Take me, for example, couldn’t you touch mine with a three-day
beating?”
Everyone looked at me a couple of seconds and then answered in unison: “We
could.”
“So there you are,” I continued. “We’ll get along without a President. We’d
better do this: let’s everybody go into the meadows and make some home-brew,
and lock Borya up. Since he’s a person of high moral qualities, let him sit there
and set up the office.”
My speech was interrupted by an ovation, and the Plenum was closed down.
The neighboring meadows lit up with the blue fire of the stills. I alone did not
share the general animation and optimism. I moved from fire to fire with a single
alarming thought: why wasn’t anyone in the world willing to have anything to do
with us? Why such silence in the world? The district is in flames, and the world is
silent because it is holding its breath, perhaps, but why has no one extended his
hand – not from the east, not from the west? What’s become of King Olaf? Why
don’t regular units crush us from the south?
Quietly I led the counselor to the side – he reeked of home-brew.
“Do you like our revolution, Vadya?”
“Yes,” Vadya answered. “It is feverish but it is beautiful.”
“So… But about Norway, Vadya, about Norway, what’s new?”
“Nothing so far… But what do you care about Norway?
“What do you mean, what do I care? Are we in a state of war with Norway or
are we not in a state? Everything is tuning out pretty stupid. We’re fighting with
her, but she doesn’t want to with us. If they don’t start bombing us by tomorrow,
I’ll sit down again in the President’s chair and then you’ll see what’ll happen!”



“Sit,” Vadya answered. “Who’s stopping you, Erofeevkins?” If you want to, go
ahead…”

VOINOVO – USAD
Not a single bomb fell on us in the morning. In opening the Third Plenum, I said:
“Senators. I see that no one in the world wants to undertake either to be
friends or to quarrel with us. All have turned away from us and have held their
breath. And since, tomorrow, punitive detachments from Petushki will arrive here
toward evening, and Aunty Shura will be out of Rossiiskaya tomorrow morning, I
am taking full power into my hands, and I’m imposing a curfew. And if that’s not
enough, I declare the powers of the President absolute and at the same time take
up the Presidency. That is, become the “personality above the law and the
prophets.”
No one objected. Only Prime Minister Borya S. winced at the word “prophets,”
looked at me wildly, and started to tremble for vengeance.
Two days later he expired in the arms of the Minister of Defense. He died from
grief and from extreme proclivity for generalization. There didn’t seem to be any
other causes, but, as to opening him up, we didn’t, because to open him up would
have been disgusting. And toward evening of the same day, all the world’s
teletypes received a communication: “Death was a result of natural causes.” It
wasn’t said whose death, but the world surmised.
The Fourth Plenum was a memorial meeting.
I gave a speech:
“Delegates. If I should ever have any children, I’ll hang on their wall a portrait
of the Procurator of Judaea, Pontius Pilate, so that they will grow up neat and
clean. Procurator Pontius Pilate standing there washing his hands – that’s the
right kind of portrait. Such am I also: I stand here and wash my hands. I joined
you simply because I was dead drunk. I told you that it is necessary to
revolutionize the heart, that it is necessary to raise souls to the mastery of eternal
moral categories, and everything else that you have undertaken, all that is vanity
and chasing of the wind.



“And think, what can we count on? Nobody is going to let us into the Common
Market. The ships of America’s Seventh Fleet will never make it here, and, really,
they won’t want to…”
At this point they were roaring from their places:
“Don’t you despair, Venya! Don’t pee in your pants! They’ll give us
bombardiers! They’ll give us B-52’s.”
“Oh, sure! Hold out your hands! It’s indeed funny to listen to you, Senators.”
“They’ll give us Phantoms, too!”
“Ha, ha. Who said that? ‘Phantoms’? One more word about Phantoms and I’ll
die laughing.”
Here, Tikhonov said, from his place:
“Maybe they won’t give us Phantoms, but they’ll give us devaluation of the
franc for sure.”
“You’re an idiot, Tikhonov, as I see it. I won’t argue that you’re a valuable
theoretician, but every time you open your yap… And besides, that’s not the
point. Why is the whole Petushki region engulfed in flames, but no one, no one
takes not of it, not even in the Petushki region? To put it bluntly, I shrug my
shoulders and leave my post of President. Like Pontius Pilate I’ll wash my hands
and, before your eyes, drink up all the rest of the Rossiiskaya. Yes. I trample on
my authority – I leave you. For Petushki.”
You can imagine what a storm was raised among the delegates, especially
when I started to drink up the rest.
And when I started to leave – when I left – you can imagine what words flew
after me. You can also imagine that I will not be repeating these words to you.
There was no repentance in my heart. I went through meadowland and
pastures, through sweetbrier thickets and herds of cattle; the grain bowed before
me and cornflowers smiled. But, I repeated, there was no repentance in my heart.
The sun had set but I went on.
“Heavenly Queen, how far is it still to Petushki?” I said to myself. “I walk and
walk and it’s nowhere. It’s really dark all around – where is Petushki?”



Where is Petushki, anyhow?” I asked, going up to somebody’s lighted veranda.
Maybe it wasn’t a veranda at all but a terrace, a mezzanine, or a wing? I don’t
really understand the difference and forever get them mixed up.
I knocked and asked, “Where’s Petushki, anyhow? Is it still far to Petushki?”
And, in response, everyone on the veranda burst out laughing and didn’t say
anything. I got offended and knocked again – the neighing on the veranda stared
up again. Strange. If that wasn’t enough, someone was neighing behind my back.
I looked around; the passengers on the Moscow-Petushki train were sitting in
their places with filthy smiles on their faces. What’s this? So, I’m still on the train?
“It’s nothing, Erofeev, nothing. Let them laugh, don’t pay any attention. As
Saadi said, ‘Be straight and simple as a cypress, and generous as a palm.’ I don’t
understand how come the palm, but, OK, be like a palm. Got any Kubanskaya left
in your pocket? Yes, I do. There you are – go out to the vestibule and have a drink.
Have a drink so you don’t get sick.”
I got up, hemmed in by a host of idiotic smirks. Alarm welled up from the very
dregs of my soul and it was impossible to know what this alarm was all about,
where it came from, and why it was so indistinct.
“Are we getting into Usad?” People were crowding around the door
expectantly and I turned to them with my question. “Are we getting into Usad?”
“You ask stupid boozy questions when you ought to stay home,” some oldtimer answered. “You’d better stay home and do tomorrow’s lessons. Probably
you haven’t done tomorrow’s stuff yet; your mama’ll get mad.”
And then he added:
“Hardly out of diapers and he’s already learned to think.”
What’s with him, has he gone off his rocker, this granddad? What mama?
What lessons? What pants? Ah no, probably it’s not granddad but me who’s gone
off his rocker. Because this other old-timer with a white, white face stood next to
me, looked me in the eye from top to bottom and said:
“Right, and anyway, where do you have to go to? It’s too late for you to get
betrothed and too early for the cemetery. Where do you have to go to, sweet
vagabond?”



“Sweet vagabond!”
I shuddered and went to the other side of the vestibule. Something is amiss in
the world. Some kind of rot in the whole kingdom and everybody’s got his brains
on crooked. Just in case, I felt myself all over… what sort of ‘sweet vagabond’ was
I? Where did he get that? What’s he been doing, reading Platonov? Sure, you can
make a little joke, but nothing quite so nonsesnsical.
I am in my right mind and they are not, or the other way around: they are all in
their right minds, and I alone am not. The feeling of alarm at the bottom of my
soul had continued rising. And as we were approaching another stop and the
doors started to open, I couldn’t resist, and again asked ane of the passengers
getting off:
“This is Usad, right?”
And (quite unexpectedly) he snapped to attention in front of me and bellowed:
“No, sir!” And then he shook my hand, leaned over, and said in my ear:
“I will never forget you kindness, Comrade First Lieutenant…”
And he got off the train, wiping away a tear with his sleeve.

USAD – KILOMETER 105
I remained where I was, in complete loneliness and complete bewilderment. No,
not quite bewilderment, but the same alarm turning into bitterness. Then, too,
the hell with it – let it be “sweet vagabond” and “First Lieutenant,” but why is it
dark outside, tell me, please? Why is it dark outside if the train left in the morning
and has gone exactly one hundred kilometers? Why?
I leaned my head on the glass… what blackness and, beyond the blackness – is
that rain or snow? Or is it just that I’m looking through tears into the dark? Oh,
God.
“Oh, that’s you,” someone said from behind my back, in such a pleasant and
malicious voice that I didn’t even need to turn around. I understood at once who
was standing there behind me. “He’ll try to tempt me now, the stoneface. He’s
been waiting for the right time to tempt me!”



“Is that you, Erofeev?” Satan asked.
“Of course it’s me, who else?”
“Tough on you, Erofeev, is it?”
“Of course it’s tough. Only that doesn’t concern you. Get moving, you’ve got
the wrong person.”
I continued to speak the same way, with my forehead buried in the window,
without turning around.
“Well, if it’s tough,” Satan went on, “subdue your transport. Subdue your
spiritual transport and it’ll be easier.”
“I won’t subdue it for anything.”
“What a fool.”
“Takes one to know one.”
“Well, OK, OK. Then don’t say a word. You know what? Better jump out of this
moving train. You just might not even get hurt.”
I thought about it and then answered, “No-o-o, I won’t jump, I’m afraid. I’d
have to get hurt.”
And Satan left in disgrace.
But what was left for me? I took half a dozen swallows from the bottle and
again leaned my head on the window. The blackness went on swimming past the
window and stirring up alarm within. And it awakened a black thought. I squeezed
my head in order to focus this thought, yet it wouldn’t focus at all but flowed
away instead like beer on a table top. “I don’t like this dark beyond the window. I
don’t like it at all.”
But the six slugs of Kubanskaya were already approaching my heart, quietly…
one by one they were approaching my heart, and my heart entered into single
combat with reason.
“So what don’t you like about the dark? Dark is dark, and you can’t do anything
about it. Dark is followed by light and light is followed by dark – that’s my opinion.
And if you don’t like it, the dark won’t cease to be dark just because of that. So
there remains only one way out: accept the dark. It’s not for us fools to get the



better of nature’s laws. Having stopped up our left nostril we can blow our nose
only with the right one. Isn’t that so? Well, then, there’s no demanding light
beyond the window if beyond the window it is dark.
“Yeah that’s true… but, you know, I did leave in the morning. At eight-sixteen,
from the Kursk Station.”
“So what if it was morning? Now, thank God, it’s autumn, the days are short –
you aren’t even able to come to and, bang, it’s dark again. And you know, it’s ohh-h-h so long to Petushki. From Moscow to Petushki is oh-h-h so long.”
“What sort of oh-h-h? Why’re you all time oh-h-h-ing? From Moscow to
Petushki is exactly two hours and fifteen minutes. Last Friday, for example…”
“What’s last Friday got to do with it? Who cares about last Friday! Last Friday
the train hardly made any stops. And, in general, trains traveled faster then, but
now, the devil knows, they stop and wait. For what? It’s enough to make you sick
sometimes. Why is it always stopping? Like that at every marker. Except Esino.”
I glanced out the window and frowned again.
“Yes-s-s, it is strange. We left at eight in the morning and we’re still going.”
Here, my heart really exploded:
“And the others? What about the others? Are they worse than you? The
others, they’re also riding along and not asking why it’s so long and why it’s so
dark. They ride along quietly looking out the window. Why do you have to ride
quicker than they? It’s funny to listen to you, Venya, funny and disgusting. If
you’ve had a drink, Venya, then don’t be so immodest, don’t think that you’re
more intelligent and better than others…”
Now this tired me out completely. I went back into the car and sat down on a
bench, trying not to look out the window. Everyone in the car, five or six people,
were dozing with their heads lowered like babies. I, too, was almost dozing off…
And suddenly jumped up from my place. “Gracious Lord! But she’s supposed to
be waiting for me at eleven in the morning. At eleven she’s supposed to be
waiting for me and outside it’s still dark. So, I’ll have to wait for her until morning.
I don’t really know where she lives. I’ve been there twelve times, always by way
of some back yards and completely smashed. How annoying that on the



thirteenth time I’m going to see her I’m completely sober. Because of that I’ll
have to wait until it finally gets light. Until it finally dawns on my thirteenth Friday.
“But, wait. As I left Moscow, it was already the dawn of my thirteenth Friday.
Which means that today is Friday. Why is it so dark outside?”
“But really, last Friday…”
“Again, your last Friday. I see, Venya, that you are completely in the past. I see
that you don’t wish to speak of the future at all.”
“No, no, listen… Last Friday, exactly at eleven in the morning, she was there on
the platform with her braid from head to tail… and it was quite light out; I
remember perfectly and I remember her braid perfectly…”
“What’s her braid got to do with it? I repeat: the days are diminishing because
it is autumn. Last Friday at eleven in the morning, I don’t argue, it was light. But
this Friday at eleven in the morning it may be so dark that you could poke your
eye out. Do you know how the days are diminishing now? Do you know? I see
that you don’t know everything, you only brag about knowing everything. You
were also talking to me about the braid! Well, a braid grows – maybe since last
Friday it’s below her tail. But autumn days, on the other hand, they’re little
snips…”
“All the same, what a dope you are, Venya.”
I hit myself not very hard across the cheek, drank three slugs, and shed a tear.
From the bottom of my soul, in place of alarm, love arose. I went all limp. “You
promised her purple lilies and you’re taking her 300 grams of ‘Cornflower’ candy.
And, look, twenty minutes from now you’ll be in Petushki and, on the platform
bathed in sunlight, you’ll get confused and hand her the ‘Cornflower.’ And
everyone around will be saying:
“For the thirteenth time running we’ve seen nothing but ‘Cornflower.’ And
we’ve never once seen any lilies or purple. And she’ll burst out laughing and
say…”
Here, I almost dozed off. I dropped my head onto my shoulder and didn’t want
to raise it again until Petushki. Once more I gave in to the flow…



KILOMETER 105 – POKROV
But they interfered with my giving in to the flow. No sooner did I drop off than
someone hit me in the back with his tail.
I quivered and turned around. There before me was someone with no feet or
tail or head.
“Who are you?” I asked in astonishment.
“Guess who?” And he burst out laughing. With the laugh of a maneater.
“Oh, yeah, you think I’m going to guess?”
I turned away, offended, in order to drop off again. But, here, someone
slammed with a crushing bow of his head into my back. I turned around again:
there before me was the very same someone without feet or tail or head.
“Why are you hitting me?” I asked him.
“You guess why!...” he answered with the same carnivorous laugh.
This time I decided to go ahead and guess. Because if I turned away from this
one, for all I knew, he’d crack me in the back with his feet.
I lowered my eyes and fell to thinking. He waited while I thought it out and
quietly raised a huge fist right up to my nostrils as if to wipe my snotty nose.
All the same he was the first to speak:
“You’re going to Petushki? To the city ‘where neither winter nor summer the
jasmine never’ and so on? Where…”
“Right, ‘where neither winter nor summer the jasmine never’ and so on.”
“Where your bucket of slop wallows about in the jasmine and the birds flutter
above her and do kiss her wherever they’ve a mind to?”
“Yes, wherever they’ve mind to.”
He burst out laughing again and hit me the pit of my stomach.
“You just listen. Before you, you see a sphinx. And he will not let you into that
city.”



“Why won’t he let me into it? There, in Petushkin, what’s wrong? The
pestilence? Did someone get betrothed to his own daughter there? And you…”
“It’s worse than a daughter or the pestilence. It’s for me to know what’s
wrong. But I told you I won’t let you in, so I won’t let you in. Or, I’ll let you in on
one condition: that you guess the answers to five of my riddles.”
“What does he need with his riddles, the viper?” I thought to myself. And said
aloud:
“Well, so don’t wear me out, let’s have your riddles. Take your huge fist away,
don’t beat me in the pit of my stomach, and let’s have your riddles.”
“What does he need with his riddles, the fucking huckster?” I thought a second
time. But he had already begun his first:
“The well-known shock-worker Aleksey Stakhanov went to the toilet for
number one two times a day and once for number two. But when he was on a
drunk, he went four times for number one and not once for number two.
Calculate how many times per year shock-worker Aleksei Stakhanov went for
number one and how many for number two, if we consider that he was on a
drunk three hundred and twelve days per year.”
I thought to myself: “Who is he hinting about, the brute? Doesn’t ever go to
the toilet? Who is he hinting about, the slime?”
I got offended and said, “That’s a bad riddle, Sphinx, that’s a riddle with piggish
implications. I won’t try to answer a riddle like that.”
“Aw, you won’t? Well, well. So you’re going to start in on me again! Listen to
the second:
“When the ships of the American Seventh Fleet docked at the Petushki Station,
there were no Communist Party girls present, but If Komsomol girls are
considered Party members, then every third one of them was a blonde. When the
ships of the American Seventh Fleet set sail, the following was discovered: every
third Komsomol girl turned out to have been raped, every fourth rape victim
turned to be a Komsomol girl, every fifth one of the Komsomol girls who had been
raped turned out to be a blonde: every ninth blonde rape victim turned to be a
Komsomol member. If there are 428 girls in all in Petushki, determine how many
non-Party brunettes among them remained untouched?”



Who, who is he hinting about now, the dog? Why are the brunettes all intact
and with the blondes it’s nothing but rape? What does he mean to say by this, the
parasite?
“I won’t try to solve this riddle either, Sphinx. You forgive me, but I won’t. It’s a
very uncouth riddle. Better give me the third.”
“Ha, ha! Here’s the third:
“As is well known, in Petushki there aren’t any points A. Moreover, there are
no points B, C, D, or E. There are only points F. So, then, polar explorer Papanin,
desiring to save polar explorer Vodopianov, departed from point F1 for point F2.
At the same moment, Vodopianov, desiring to save Papanin, departed from point
F2 for point F1. It is not known why both of them tuned up at point F3, located
twelve of Vodopianov’s spitting distances from point F1 and sixteen of Papanin’s
spitting distances from point F2. It it is allowed that Papanin could spit three
meters and seventy-two centimeters and that Vodopianov couldn’t spit at all, did
Papanin indeed set out to save Vodopianov?
My God. What’s he up to, has he lost his marbles, this mangy sphinx? Where’s
he headed? Why is it that in Petushki there are no points A, B, C, D, or E, but only
F’s? What is he hinting at, the bitch?
“Ha, ha,” cried the Sphinx, rubbing his hands together. You won’t try to solve
this one either?! Not this one either?! Got you worried, egghead? Then here’s the
fourth for you:
“Lord Chamberlain, Primier of the British Empire, while departing the
restaurant of the Petushki Railroad Station, slipped on somebody’s vomit and, in
falling, turned over the next table. On the table, before the fall, there were two
pastries at thirty-five kopeks, two potions of beef Stroganoff at seventy-three
kopeks each, two portions of udder at thirty-nine kopeks and two carafes each
containing 800 grams of sherry. None of the crockery was broken. All the food
was ruined. But here’s what happened with the sherry: one carafe did not break,
but everything spilled out of it to the last drop. The other carafe broke to
smithereens, but not a drop spilled out of it. If it is allowed that the cost of an
empty carafe is six times more than a portion of udder, while every child knows
the cost of sherry, tell me what bill was presented to Lord Chamberlain, Premier
of the British Empire, in the Kursk Station restaurant?”



“What do you mean, ‘the Kursk Station?”
“I mean ‘the Kursk Station.’”
“But didn’t he slip-where? He slipped in Petushki. Lord Chamberlain, he slipped
in the Petushki restaurant!”
“But he paid the bill at the Kursk Station. How much was the bill?”
Good God! Where do sphinxes like this come from?
Without feet, without a head, without a tail, and, what’s more, dreaming up such
rubbish. And with the snout of a brigand. What’s he hinting at, the pig?
“That’s no riddle, Sphinx. That’s mockery.”
“NO, it isn’t mockery, Venya. This is a riddle. If you don’t like this one, then…”
“Then give me the last one, go on.”
“Let’s have the last one. Only listen carefully:
“Take our two folk heroes: Minin and, coming toward him, Pozharsky. ‘You’re
acting a bit strange today, Minin,’ says Pozharsky, ‘like you drank a lot today,
‘Yeah, you, too, Pozharsky, you’re asleep on your feet.’ ‘Tell me, sincerely, Minin,
how much have you drunk today?’ ‘I’ll tell you right off:
“ ‘First, 150 grams of Rossiiskaya, then 580 of Kubanskaya, 150 of Stolichnaya,
125 of pepper vodka and 700 grams of beer and vodka mix. And you?’ ‘I drank
exactly the, Minin.’
“ ‘So where are you going now, Pozharsky?’ ‘Where else? To Petushki, of
course. And you, Minin?’ ‘Me too, I’m also going to Petushki. You know, Prince,
you’re not heading the right way at all!’ ‘No, it’s you who’s headed in the wrong
direction, Minin.’ In other words, they convinced each other that it was necessary
to turn back. Pozharsky set off in the direction. And they both ended up at the
Kursk Station.
“So. Now you tell me: if they both had kept the same course and gone their
previous directions, where would they have ended up? Where would Pozharsky
have gotten to? Tell me.”
“To Petushki?” I offered hopefully.



“Not so, as it were. Ha, ha. Pozharsky would have ended up at the Kursk
Station. That’s where.”
And the sphinx burst out laughing and got up on both feet:
“And Minin? Where would Minin have ended up, if he had gone in his own
direction and not listened to Pozharsky’s advice? Where would Minin have gotten
to?”
“Perhaps to Petushki?” I wasn’t very hopeful any more and all but started
crying. “To Petushki, right?”
“You don’t want to try the Kursk Station?! Ha, ha. Minin too will get to the
Kursk Station. So which of them will end up at Petushki, ha, ha? Nobody, in
general, ha, ha, will end up in Petushki!”
What sort of laugh was it that this scoundrel had? Not once in my life had I
heard such blood-curdling laughter. If only he had just laughed – but then, still
laughing, he grabbed me by the nose with two of his members and pulled me off
somewhere.
“Where, where are you dragging me to, Sphinx? Where are you dragging me
to?”
“You’ll soon see where. Ha, ha! You’ll see.”

POKROV – KILOMETER 113
He dragged me out to the vestibule, turned me around with my face to the
window and dissolved into thin air. What did he have to do that for?
I looked out the window. Now the old blackness beyond the window was no
longer there. On the sweaty glass someone’s finger had marked: “…” And
through these little gaps I caught sight of city lights, lots of city lights and a station
sign swimming past – “Pokrov.”
“Pokrov! A town in the Petushki Region. Three stops and then Petushki. You’re
on the right path, Venedikt Erofeev.” And then my alarm, which had risen from
the bottom of my soul, started back toward the bottom of my soul and fell quiet
there. But then something else started up again from the bottom of my soul – one
thought, one monstrous thought rushed upon me so that I felt weak in the knees.



Here I am leaving the Pokrov Station. I saw the sign “Pokrov” and the bright
lights. All this bodes well, both “Pokrov” and the bright lights. But why did they
appear on the right side of the train? I admit that my reason is in a bit of an
eclipse, but, really, I’m no kid, I do know that if the Pokrov Station appears on the
right it means I’m going away from Petushki toward Moscow and not away from
Moscow toward Petushki. Oh, that mangy sphinx! I was struck dumb and started
to rush about the car; as luck would have it there wasn’t a soul in it. “Hold it,
Venichka, don’t rush it. Stupid heart, don’t beat. Maybe you’ve gotten a little
confused, maybe Pokrov was on the left and not the right after all? Go on out and
take a better look at what side of the train the glass was marked on.”
I leapt to the end of the car and looked on the right: on the sweaty glass clearly
and prettily was written “…” I looked on the left: there too was written “…” I
grabbed my head and returned to the car and again was struck dumb and started
to rush about.
“Hold it… do you remember, Venichka, the whole was from Moscow you sat on
the left side of the train, and all the black moustaches and Mitriches and
Decembrists sat on the right? Which means that if you’re going in the right
direction, your suitcase should be lying on the left side of the train. See, it’s so
simple!”
I ran the length of the car looking for my suitcase. My suitcase was nowhere to
be found – not on the right, not on the left.
Where is my suitcase?!
“Well, OK, OK, Venya, calm down. So what? The suitcase is nonsense, you’ll
find the suitcase later. First, make up your mind – where you’re going. Then look
for your suitcase. First, get it clear in your mind, then later the suitcase. Make up
your mind or the million in cash, which? Of course, first the mind, then the
million.”
“You’ve got class, Venya. Drink the rest of the Kubanskaya to the fact that
you’ve got class.”
And so I threw back my head and drank up my last drop. And right away the
dark into which I had been plunged cleared away, and dawn broke in the very
depths of my soul and my reason, and sheet lightning glimmered once for every
swallow.



“Man should not be lonely – that’s my opinion. Man should give of himself to
people, even if they don’t want to take. But if he is lonely anyway, he should go
through the cars. He should find people and tell them: ‘Look. I’m lonely, I’ll give of
myself to the last drop (because I just drank up the last drop, ha-ha!) and you give
of yourselves to me and, having given, tell me where are we going. From Moscow
to Petushki or from Petushki to Moscow?’”
“And according to you, man should act just like that?” I asked myself, inclining
my head to the left.
“Yes. Just like that,” I answered myself, inclining my head to the right. “It’s not
the place for examining ‘…’ on sweaty glass and agonizing over riddles.”
And I set off through the train. No one was in the first car; rain splashed in
through the open windows. In the second there wasn’t anybody either; the rain
wasn’t even splashing in.
In the third, there was someone…

KILOMETER 113 – OMUTISHCHE
…And woman, all in black from head to foot, was standing by a window and
distractedly looking at the gloom outside; she pressed a lace handkerchief to her
lips. “Like two peas in a pod: a copy of Inconsolable Grief, a copy of you, Erofeev,”
I thought, and at once burst out laughing to myself.
Quickly, on tiptoe, so as not to scare off the enchantment, I crept up to her
from behind. The woman was crying.
See! Man goes off by himself to have a cry. But, primevally, he is not lonely.
When man cries he simply does not want anyone to be party to his tears. And
he’s justified, for is there anything on earth higher than that which is
inconsolable?
“Princess,” I called quietly.
“So whadaya want?” the Princess responded, gazing out the window.
“Nothing…”
“Then you’d better sit down and shut up – you’ll look positively intelligent.”



Is it for me – in my position – to be silent? Me, who went through all the cars
for the solution to the riddle? Pity that I forgot what the riddle was about. But I
remember it was something very important. OK, later I’ll think of it. A woman is
crying and that is much more important. Oh, shameful beings! You have
transformed my earth into the shittiest hell, and you force us to hide tears from
people and to put laughter up for show. Oh, miserable scum. You have left people
with nothing except “sorrow” and “fear” and, after that, their laughter is public
but their tears are banned.
Oh, to say it now, so as to burn them, the beasts, with my fiery word.
“Princess, oh, Princess…”
“So whadaya want again?”
“Hey, listen, Princess. Where is your valet, Peter? I haven’t seen him since
August.”
“What’re you spouting?”
Honestly, I haven’t seen him since… Where’s he, your valet?”
“Same place as yours,” the Princess snapped. And suddenly she tore away from
her place and strode toward the doors, sweeping the floor of the car with her
dress. Right at the doors she stopped, turned her husky, cracked, tear-stained
face toward me and cried, “I hate you, Tsar Andrei Mikhailovich! I ha-te you.” And
disappeared.
“So that’s i-i-it,” I drawled triumphantly, as the Decembrist had, recently. “She
really told me off.” And left just like that, not answering about important things.
Mother of Heaven, what was that important thing? In the name of your gifts, let
me recall! “Valet!”
I rang the bell… An hour later I rang again.
“Va-a-let!!”
A servant came in dressed completely in yellow, my valet by the name of Peter.
When I was drunk once I had somehow convinced him to wear all yellow till his
dying day, the fool, and he’d dressed in it since then. “You know what, Peter?
Was I asleep just now, or not? What do you think? Was I asleep?”
“In the other car, yes.”



“But in this one, no?”
“No, not in this one.”
“That amazes me, Peter… Light the candelabra. Otherwise, you know, I’ll
become alarmed again… So, Peter, if I’m to believe you, I was asleep in the other
car, but awoke in this one. Right?”
“I don’t know. I was asleep myself in this car.”
“Hm. Good. But why didn’t you get up and wake me? Why?”
“And why should I get up and wake you? There was no reason for waking you
in this car, when you woke up in here by yourself.”
“Don’t get me mixed up, Peter, don’t mix me up. Let’s remember. You see,
Peter, I wasn’t able to resolve one single thought. And how great this thought is.”
“What thought is that?”
“This: do I have anything left to drink?

OMUTISCHE – LEONOVO
“No, no. Don’t think that that is really the thought; that is simply the means by
which to resolve it. You understand, when the booze leaves the heart, fears and
shakiness of consciousness appear. If I’d drink something now, I wouldn’t be so
broken-up and incoherent… It isn’t very noticeable, is it, that I’m broken up?”
“Nothing at all is noticeable. Only your fat face is swollen.”
“Oh, that’s nothing. The face is nothing…”
“And there’s also nothing to drink,” Peter offered, and he got up and lit the
candelabra.
I shook myself: “It’s a good thing you lit them, good, otherwise, know what?
It’s a bit alarming. We keep going on the whole night and there’s no one with us,
except us.
“But where’s you Princess, Peter?”
“She got off long ago.”



“Where did she get off?”
“At Khrapunovo. She was riding from Petushki to Khrapunovo. She got on at
Orekhovo-Zuevo and got off at Khrapunovo.”
“What Khrapunovo is that? What do you keep spouting, Peter? Don’t you mix
me up, don’t mix me up… So, so… the most important thought… I’ve got Anton
Chekhov on my mind for some reason. Yes, and Friedrich Schiller, Friedrich
Schiller and Anton Chekhov. And why, I haven’t the vaguest. Right, right… now it’s
getting clearer: Friedrich Schiller, when he sat down to write a tragedy, he’d stick
his feet into champagne. Actually, no, that wasn’t Schiller. That was State
Counselor Goethe, he’d walk around the house in slippers and a bathrobe. But I,
no – I go around the house without a bathrobe, I go on the street in slippers. And
what’s Schiller got to do with it anyway? Yes, here’s what: when it happened that
he drank vodka, he’d put his feet into champagne, soak and drink. Good. But
Chekhov, before he died, he said, ‘I want a drink.’ And died…”
Peter kept looking at me, standing above me, watching as I collected my
thoughts. There was also Hegel. That I remember well: there was Hegel. He’d say,
“There are no distinctions, except distinctions in degree, between various degrees
and the absence of distinction.” That is, If you translate it into good language:
“Who doesn’t drink these days?”
“Do we have anything to drink, Peter?”
“No, nothing. It’s all gone.”
“And there isn’t anyone on the whole train?”
“No.”
“So…”
I fell to thinking again. And strange was my thought. It was enveloped around
something in such a way that it itself was enveloped in something. And that
“something” was also strange. And my soul, my soul was heavy.
What was I doing just then, falling asleep or waking up?
I don’t know, and how could I know? “There’s a state, but there’s no name for it,
not sleep nor waking is it.” I dozen like that for about twelve or thirty-five
minutes.



And when I came to there wasn’t a soul in the car, and Peter had disappeared
somewhere. The train continued to race through the rain and the blackness. It
was strange to listen to the slamming of doors in all the cars, strange because
there wasn’t a single soul in any of the cars.
I lay there like a corpse, in icy perspiration, and fear kept building under my
heart.
“Va-a-let.”
Peter appeared in the door with a bluish, evil face. “Come over here, Peter,
come over here. You’re also all wet, why? That was you just now slamming the
doors, right?”
“I wasn’t slamming anything. I was asleep.”
“Who was slamming the doors then?”
Peter looked at me without blinking.
“Oh, that’s nothing, nothing. If alarm is growing under your heart, you’ve got
to stifle it, and in order to stifle it, you’ve got to have a drink. But do wwe have
anything to drink?
“No, nothing. It’s all gone.”
“And isn’t there anyone at all in the whole world?”
“No one.”
“You’re lying, Peter, you’re always lying to me! If there isn’t anyone else, then
who’s banging around with the doors and windows? Huh? Do you know? Do you
hear? You’ve got something to drink, no doubt, and you keep lying to me!”
Peter was looking at me, always the same, unblinking and spiteful. I saw by his
ugly face that I had gotten to the core of him, that I understood him, and that
now he feared me. Yes, yes, he had fiddled around with the candelabrum and put
it out himself, and then went along through the car putting out the lights. “He’s
ashamed, ashamed,” I thought. But he had already jumped out the window.
I cried, “Come back, Peter,” in a voice even I couldn’t recognize. “Come back!”
“Trickster!” he answered from behind the window.



And suddenly he flitted back into the car again and flew up to me, and tore at
my hair with the most desperate spite.
“What’s with you, Peter? What’s with you?!”
“Nothing. Stay, stay on here, hag. Stay, old bitch! Go on to Moscow. Sell your
seeds there. I can’t stand it, I can’t st-a-a-and it.”
And once more he flitted away, this time for good.
“The devil knows what’s up. What’s with the bunch of them?” I squeezed my
temples, shuddered and shook with me.

LEONOVO – PETUSHKI
The doors started to click, then to bang louder and louder, more and more clearly.
And then into my car and through it flew the tractor driver Evtushenkin, his face
blue with fear. And a dozen moments later, the very same way, a horde of Erinyes
raced after him, tambourines and cymbals clanging.
My hair stood on end. Forgetting myself, I stamped my feet: “Stop, girls!
Goddesses of vengeance, stop! No one in the world is guilty. “But they all ran on,
and when the last one drew even with me, I was boiling and grabbed her from
behind. She was panting.
“Where are you going? Where are you all running to?”
“Whadaya want? Unhand me, let go!”
“Where? Where are we all going??”
“And what business is it of yours, cr-a-a-a-zy man?...”
And suddenly she turned toward me, clasped my head and kissed me on the
forehead so unexpectedly that I became embarrassed, sat down and started to
nibble on a sunflower seed.
And as I was nibbling away, she returned and slammed past my left cheek. She
slammed past it, soared toward the ceiling, and rushed off after the others. I tore
after her.



The sun was ablaze in the west and the horses shied, and where is that
happiness which they write about in the newspapers? I ran and ran through
whirlwind and gloom, ripping doors off their hinges. I realized that the Moscow –
Petushki train was flying off over the embankment. The cars heaved upward, then
fell back again, as if overcome by stupor. And then I started to rush about crying:
“O-o-o-oh! St-o-o-o-p! A-a-ah!”
And was struck dumb. The chorus of Erinyes was racing back from the head of
the train straight at me in a panic-stricken herd. Evtushenkin, white with rage,
was chasing after them. The whole mass knocked me down and buried me
underneath their feet.
They went on clanging their cymbals and clattering their tambourines. And
stars fell on the porch of the Agro-Soviet. And the maid of Shulam roared with
laughter.

PETUSHKI. THE PLATFORM
And then everything started to swirl around. If you say that it was fog, I probably
would agree with you – yes, it was fog. But if you say, “No, it wasn’t fog, it was
fire and ice,” probably you’re right – fire and ice. That is, at first the blood grows
cold, grows cold – and the moment it freezes, it starts boiling and, having boiled
up, it grows cold again.
“I’ve got a fever,” I thought, “this hot fog everywhere, it’s from a fever because
I’m shivering myself and there’s hot fog everywhere. And someone very familiar
appears from out of the fog, Achilles –not Achilles but very familiar. Oh, now I
see, it’s the Pontic King Mithridates, all smeared with snot, with a penknife in his
hand…
“Mithridates, that you, is it?” I said, barely able to make sounds. “That you, is
it, Mithridates?”
“It is I,” the Pontic King answered.
“And why are you all smeared up?”
“I’m always like this – come the full moon and the snot starts running.”
“It doesn’t at other times?”



“Sometimes it does, but not like during the full moon.”
“And what about it, don’t you wipe your nose at all?” I asked, almost
whispering. “Don’t you?”
“Oh, what can I say? Sometimes I do, but in the full of the moon can you
actually wipe it? Not so much as you smear it around. Really, everybody’s got his
own style. Some will let it run, others will wipe it, still others will smear it around.
But me, in the full of the moon…”
I interrupted him:
“You talk a good game, Mithridates, but what do you have the knife in your
hand for?”
“What do you think? He’s asking! To cut you up with, that’s what for!”
And how he changed suddenly. He had talked quietly all the while, but now he
bared his teeth, turned black – and where did all the snot get to? And, on top of
that, he roared with laughter again. Then he bared his teeth again, then again
roared with laughter.
I was hit by the shivers once more. “What are you up to, Mithridates?” I
whispered or cried, I don’t know which. “Get rid of the knife, what do you need
with a knife?” But he couldn’t hear anything anymore. He threatened me; it was
as if a thousand devils possessed him.
“Savage!”
And then he stabbed me in the left side, and I started to moan quietly, because
I didn’t even have the strength to try to raise my arm to protect myself from the
knife. “Stop it, Mithridates, stop it…”
But he stabbed me in the right side, then the left again, then the right. I only
succeeded in screaming helplessly and rushing about the platform in pain. I woke
up with cramps all over. There was nothing around except the wind, the dark, and
devilish cold. “What’s with me and where am I? Why is it drizzling? Oh, God…”
And I fell asleep again. And again it started up the same, the shivers and the
heat and the fever and, from far off, over there where the fog swirled, those two
lanky figures from Mukhina’s huge sculpture emerged, the worker with his
hammer and the peasant woman with her sickle, and they came right up to me,



both with smirks on their faces. And the worker hit me on the head with his
hammer and then the peasant woman gave it to me in the balls with her sickle. I
cried out, probably aloud, and woke up once more; this time I was in convulsions,
everything in me was shuddering – my face and clothes and soul and thoughts.
Oh, this pain. Oh, this devilish cold. Oh, the impossibility of it. If every one of
the Fridays ahead is like this one, some Thursday I’ll hang myself. I was expecting
some other kind of convulsions from you, Petushki. While I was getting to you,
who cut up your birds and trampled on your jasmine? Queen of Heaven, I am in
Petushki!
“It’s nothing, Erofeev, it’s nothing… Talife cumi, as the Savior said; that is, get
up and go. I know, I know, you’re beat, in all your members and in the depths of
your soul, and it’s wet and empty here on the platform and nobody met you and
no one will ever meet you. All the same, get up and go. Try it… But, God, your
suitcase with the goodies? Two cups of nuts for the kid, ‘Cornfalower’ candy and
the empty bottle… Where’s your suitcase? Who stole it? After all, it had the
goodies in it. But take a look, do you have any money, maybe just a little? Yes,
yes, a little, hardly anything. But what good is money now? Oh, the ephemeral.
Oh, vanity. Oh, that most infamous and shameful of times in the life of my people
– the time from the closing of the liquor stores until dawn!
It’s nothing, Erofeev, nothing. Talife cumi, as your Tsaritsa said when you were
lying in your coffin; that is, arise, brush off your coat, clean up your pants, shake
the dust off, and go on. Try two steps, anyway, the rest will be easier. You
yourself told your little boy when he was sick, ‘One-two-button-your-shoe, aren’tyou-ashamed-to-be-lying-in-bed…’ The main thing is to get off the tracks; trains
are always going by here, from Moscow to Petushki, from Petushki to Moscow.
Get off the tracks. Then you’ll find out why there’s not a soul around and why she
didn’t meet you and everything. Go on, Venichka, go on.”

PETUSHKI. STATION SQUARE
“If you want to go to the left, Venichka, go to the left. If you want to go right, go
right. It’s all the same, so you might as well follow your nose…”
Someone told me once that it’s very simple to die: to do it you’ve got to
breathe in forty times altogether, deep, deep, as deep as you can, and breathe



out the same way, from the depths of your heart, and than you’ll let go of your
soul. Maybe I should try it?
Oh, hold it! Maybe I should find out what time it is. But who can I ask, if there’s
not a single soul in the square, not a single one? And if some living soul did come
along, could you even get your mouth open with the cold and the grief? Yes. Oh,
the muteness of the cold and the grief!
And if I die sometime – I’m going to die very soon – I know I’ll die as I am,
without accepting this world, perceiving it close up and far away, inside and out,
perceiving but not accepting it. I’ll die and He will ask me: “Was it good there for
you? Was it bad there for you?” I will be silent, with lowered eyes. I’ll be silent
that muteness familiar to everyone who knows the outcome of days of hard
boozing. For isn’t the life of man a momentary boozing of the soul? And an eclipse
of the soul as well? We are all as if drunk, only everybody in his own way: one
person has drunk more, the next less. And it works differently on each: the one
laughs in the face of this world, while the next cries on its bosom. One has already
thrown up and feels better, while the next is only starting of feel like throwing up.
But me, what am I? I’ve partaken of much, but nothing works on me. I haven’t
really laughed properly, even once, and I’ve never thrown up, even once. I, who
have partaken of so much in this world that I’ve lost count and the sequence of it
all, I am soberer than anyone else in this world; it’s simply that nothing much
works on me. “Why are you silent?” the Lord, all in blue lightning, asks me. So,
what shall I answer him? I’ll just be silent, silent…
Maybe I should open my mouth after all? Find some living soul and ask for the
time?
What do you need the time for, Venichka? Better go on, back to the wind, and
get going bit by bit. Once you had a heavenly paradise, you could have found out
the time last Friday, but now your heavenly paradise is no more, what do you
need with the time? Your Tsaritsa did not come to you on the platform with her
lashes lowered. A deity has turned away from you, so what do you need to find
out the time for? “Not a woman but blancmange,” as you once called her in jest,
she didn’t come to you on the platform. The delight of humankind, the lily of the
valley, did not come to meet you. What’s the point of finding out the time after
that, Venichka?



What’s left to you? In the morning to moan, it the evening to cry, at night to
grind your teeth. And who, who in the world cares about your heart? Who? Just
go into any hove in Petushki, knock on any door and ask, “What do you care
about my heart?” Oh, my God…
I went around the corner and knocked on the first door I came to.

PETUSHKI. SADOVY CIRCLE
I knocked and stood shivering in the cold waiting for them to open to door.
“Strange, the tall buildings they’ve put up in Petushki. However, it’s always like
that with a long, hard drunk: people seem hideously angry, the streets excessively
wide, the houses terribly big… Everything gets bigger with a hangover, exactly as
much as everything seemed more insignificant than usual when you were drunk.
Do you remember the premise of that guy with the black moustache?”
I knocked again, a little harder than before.
“Is it really so difficult to open the door to someone and let him in to warm up
for three minutes? I don’t understand it. They, they’re serious and don’t
understand it, but I’m a lightweight and I’ll never understand it… Mene, tekel,
parsin, that is, tekel. So let it be, let it…
“But if there are scales or not, all the same, on those scales sighs and tears
outweigh calculation and design. I know that better than you know anything. I’ve
lived through a lot, I’ve drunk and thought through a lot and I know what I’m
saying. All your guiding stars are rolling toward the horizon and, if not, they’re
barely glimmering. I don’t know you, people, I know you badly. I rarely paid any
attention to you, but I’ve got something for you: I’m concerned with what your
souls are taken with, now, in order to know for sure whether the Star of
Bethlehem will blaze forth once again or once again start to glimmer. Because all
the others are rolling toward the horizon, or if they aren’t, they’re barely
glimmering – and even if they are, they aren’t worth two gobs of spit.
“If there are scales there or not – there, we lightweights will outweigh and
overcome. I believe in that more firmly than you believe in anything. I believe, I
know, and I bear witness to it to the world. But it’s strange how the streets have
gotten so wide in Petushki…”



I moved away from the door and wearily gazed from one house to the other,
from one front hallway to the other. And while a single oppressive thought
terrible to pronounce together with an oppressive conjecture also terrible to
pronounce clawed at me, I went on and on, and I stared intently at every house,
with difficulty. There were tears in my eyes, from the cold and from something
else.
“Don’t cry, Erofeev, don’t cry… Why should you? And why are you shaking so?
From the cold and from something else, too? You needn’t…”
If I had had twenty swallows of Kubanskaya, they would have gone to the heart
and the heart would have been able to convince reason that I was in Petushki. But
I didn’t have any Kubanskaya. I turned onto a back street once again started to
shake and to cry…
And here something happened more terrifying than anything seen in a dream.
In the very same back street, four men came toward me. I recognized them at
once – I won’t tell you who they were – I started shaking even more than before,
convulsively.
They came up and surrounded me. How can I explain to you what sort of ugly
faces they had? No, not at all like brigands – rather, there was a touch of
something classical about them. But the eyes of all four have you ever sat in the
toilet in the Petushki Station and do you remember how, far below the round
openings, that reddish-brown piss-water splashes and glitters? That’s the kind of
eyes they all had. And the fourth one looked like… I’ll tell you later whom the
fourth one looked like.
“Well, now you’ve had it,” one of them said.
“What do you mean, ‘I’ve had it’?” My voice was trembling terribly, from the
hangover and from the chill. They assumed that it was from fear.
“Like this, you’ve had it! And you’re not going anywhere ever again.”
“Why?”
“Because.”
“Listen…” My voice broke. Now my every nerve was trembling, not only my
voice. At night no one can be sure of himself – that is, I mean to say, on a cold
night. The Apostle betrayed Christ thrice before the cock crew. I know why he



betrayed Him: because he was shivering from the cold. He was still warming
himself by the fire, together with them. But I don’t have a fire, no, and I’ve been
boozing for a week . And if they were to torture me now, I would betray him to
the seven times seventieth time and more…
“Listen,” I said to them, the best I could. “You let me go… what am I to you? I
just didn’t get to my girl… I was on my way but didn’t get there, I just overslept.
They stole my suitcase while I was asleep, it had a little stuff in it, but it’s a pity all
the same… The ‘Cornflower’…”
“What’s a cornflower’ got to do with it?” one of them asked spitefully.
“Oh, candy, ‘Cornflower’ candy… and 200grams of nuts, taking them to the kid;
I promised him because he really knows his alphabet letter… but that’s
nonsense… Once it gets light I’ll start out again… without money, without
presents, but they’ll understand, they won’t say a thing… on the contrary.”
All four stared at me intently and all four probably thought, “The bum, what a
coward, how transparent!” Oh, let them, let them think it, if only they’d let me
go! Where, in what newspaper, have I seen their repulsive faces?
“I want to go to Petushki again…”
“You’re not going to any Petushki!!”
“Well, supposed I don’t, then I want to go to the Kursk Station.”
“There won’t be any station for you!”
“And why not?”
“Just because!”
One of them swung his arm and hit me in the cheek; another, with his fist, in
my face; the two others moved in, too. All the same, I remained standing and
moved off quietly, quietly, quietly, but all four kept quietly after me.
“Run, Venichka, any place at all, doesn’t matter where. Run to the Kursk
Station. To the left or the right or back, it doesn’t matter where you end up. Run,
Venichka, run…”
I grabbed myself by the head and started running. With them behind me.



PETUSHKI. THE KREMLIN.
“Maybe this is Petushki after all?... Why aren’t there any people on the streets?
Have they all died off? If the four of them catch up, they’ll kill me… and who’ll be
there to hear my screaming? There’s not a single light in any window, but – it’s
fantastic - the street lights are shining, shining without batting an eye.
“It’s very possible this is Petushki. That building straight ahead over ther, it’s
the Regional Social Welfare Agency, there, beyond, it’s dark forever and ever and
the resting place of departed souls. Oh, no, no!”
I leapt out into a square covered with wet paving stones, took a breath and
looked around.
“No, this isn’t Petushki! If He, if He has departed the earth forever but sees
every one of us, I know that He never once looked this way… And if He never left
the earth, if He passed through it barefoot and dressed as a slave, He passed this
place by and went off somewhere…
“No, this isn’t Petushki. He did not pass Petushki by. He was tired and took his
rest in Petushki and I have noticed in many souls there the ashes and smoke of his
campfire…
“No, this isn’t Petushki!” The Kremlin shone before me in all its splendor. Even
though I heard the clattering pursuit behind me, I had time to think: “I, who have
passed through all Moscow, up and down, drunk and sober, I’ve never seen the
Kremlin, and, when I went hunting for it, I always ended up at the Kursk Station.
And now, finally, I see it when the Kursk Station. And now, finally, I see it when
the Kursk Station is more necessary to me than anything on earth!
“Inscrutable are your ways…”
They were getting closer and closer, and I couldn’t seem to catch my breath in
order to run on. I could only drag myself over to the Kremlin wall and collapse.
They came across the Square, two from either side. “Who are they and what
have I done to them?” It didn’t occur to me to ask. “Who cares? Either they’ll see
me or they won’t – who cares, anyway? There’s no need to tremble, what I need
is rest, that is my desire… Deliver me, Lord…”
But they spotted me. Came up and surrounded me, puffing heavily. It’s a good
thing I was able to get up on my feet – they would have killed me.



“You wanted – you wanted to run away from us?” one of them hissed, and
grabbed me by the hair, slamming my head into the Kremlin wall with all his
strength. It seemed to me that I split in two from the pain. Blood streamed down
my face and under my collar. I almost fell but managed to remain standing. They
started to beat me up.
“Give it to him in the guts, with your boot in the guts. Let him squirm!”
My God! I broke away and ran off down the Square. “Run, Venichka, if you can,
run off, they can’t run at all.” I stopped for two moments by the monument and
wiped the blood from my eyes in order to see better. I first looked at Minin and
then at Pozharsky, then Minin again – where, which direction should I run? Where
is the Kursk Station and where should I run? There was no time to think; I ran off
in the direction in which Prince Dmitri Pozharsky was looking.

MOSCOW/PETUSHKI. AN UNIDENTIFIED FRONT HALLWAY
Right up to the very last moment, I was still counting on saving myself. Even when
I ran into some strange front hallway, climbed up to the top landing and collapsed
again, I still kept on hoping. “Oh, it’s nothing, nothing, your heart will quite down
in an hour, you’ll wash off the blood, lie down, Venichka, lie down till morning and
then you’ll go to the Kursk Station and… You don’t need to shake like that, I
already told you, you don’t have to…”
My heart was beating so it was difficult to hear and all the same I heard – the
door below opened slowly and, for five moments, didn’t close again.
Trembling all over, I said to myself, Talife cumi, that is, “Get up and prepare for
the end…” This isn’t Talife cumi, it’s lama savahfani, as the Savior said… That’s is,
“Why hast thou forsaken me?”
The Lord was silent.
Angels of heaven, they’re coming up, what should I do? What should I do, now,
so as not to die? Angels!
And the angels burst out laughing. Do you know how angels laugh? They are
shameful creatures… should I tell you how they burst out laughing just now? A



long time ago, in Lobna – at the station – a man was cut up by a train, cut up in an
unbelievable way: his whole lower half was crushed to smithereens and scattered
over the road bed, but his upper half from the belt up remained as if alive, and
stood by the tracks, the way busts of various pigs stand on pedestals. The train
pulled away but he – that half of him – remained standing there, and on his face
there was a sort perplexity and his mouth half open. A lot of people couldn’t
stand to look at it and turned away, pale, with a deathly weariness in their hearts.
But some children ran up to him, three or four children, they had picked up a
lighted cigarette butt from somewhere and stuck it in the dead man’s half-open
mouth. And the cigarette butt continued to smoke and the children ran around
roaring with laughter.
That’s how the heavenly angels laughed at me then. They laughed, and God
was silent… And I had already caught sight of the four of them, they were
climbing up from the floor just below. But when I saw them, I was really more
surprised than afraid. All four of them were climbing the stairs barefoot, with
their shoes in their hands. Why was this necessary? So as not to make noise in the
hall? Or in order to sneak up on me unnoticed? I don’t know, but it was the last
thing that I remember. That is, this feeling of surprise.
They didn’t even stop to rest, but rushed from the top of the stair to strangle
me, right away, five or six hands. I tried to untangle their hands and defend my
throat as best I could. And then the worst thing of all happened: the one with the
fiercest and most classical profile pulled a huge awl with a wooden handle out of
his pocket, maybe not even an awl but a screwdriver or something else, I don’t
know. But he ordered all the others to hold my hands, and no matter how I tried
to defend myself they pinned me down to the floor, half-crazy.
“What for? What-for-what-for-what-for?” I muttered.
They stuck their awl into my throat.
I didn’t know that there was pain like that in the world. And I writhed from the
torture of it – a clotted red letter “Ю” spread across my eyes and started to
quiver. And since then I have not regained consciousness, and I never will.
In 94-95 years in St. Petersburg was a fashion to distill trains between the lines directly from passengers.
That is, for example, a train arrives from the Baltic to the Technological Institute, and the driver announces: “Citizens are passengers, our train goes to line two. The next station is “Sennaya Polschad”. Further, the train goes not directly, but on the arrow turns off and rolls out on another line.
Here I came across a similar route with my friends who got into the St. Petersburg metro for the first time.
We descend to the "Area of the uprising" and wait for the train in the direction of "Vladimirskaya". A train is coming up, and there is a sign behind the front glass - “The Square of Uprising”.
Friends do not suspect that we are just at this station and we are not surprised. I wait for the driver to ask the passengers from the cars, but he is silent. Well, I think maybe I just forgot to remove the sign. Okay.
Passengers land (most of them didn’t look at the plate at all), it looks like the train will go further. Well, we sit down.
Doors are closing. And the train backs up. Everything. The mousetrap slammed.
In the car easy panic. Machinist is silent. My friends are surprised by the strangeness of the train schedule, and nothing more.
For ten minutes (!) We, with a snail's speed, rush along incomprehensible tunnels and roll out at Mayakovskaya (who doesn’t know - the transfer station from the “Uprising Square”).
The autoinformer turns on: “Carefully close the doors ... the next station“ Gostiny Dvor ”Passengers are in deep down.
Friends have not yet cut chips. I say to them: “Damn, they took the wrong train”; we get out of the car and go over the passage again to "pl. Uprising.
We go to it from the same side - it is impossible not to recognize it - and friends immediately recognize it.
Easy stupor.
I am leading the company to the same direction with a cheerful step, from which we drove off fifteen minutes ago and calmly got into the approached train.
The finish.

I live in Moscow since 1986. But sometimes I go to other cities. In the USSR, I saw the metro, except for Moscow, but still in St. Petersburg. A stunning impression on me in the St. Petersburg metro was made by the mysterious movements of regular trains from line to line. We sit in the subway car at the station Vasileostrovskaya in the direction of Elizarovskaya. "The train goes to Komsomolskaya station" (it was before the breakthrough of groundwater into the tunnel on the Kirov-Vyborg line). I'm thinking. The wife generally understands little in the Leningrad metro. Well, I think it suits us. We all up to "PL. Lenin "(we lived in the hotel" St. Petersburg "). I explain to my wife. Have fun. Further, the stations - Mayakovskaya, and then the train indecently wanders through the tunnels, finally - Vosstaniya Square. (i.e. the same Mayakovskaya, only a transfer station on a different line). Next to us sits grandmother - God's dandelion. “There was no train for a long time,” she suddenly thinks out loud. Tugged at my tongue to tell her that we came without a transfer from line 3.
Grandma suddenly begins to scream at the whole car: “Young people would be shameful! I am eighty one years old! I survived the blockade! And you are deceiving me! Shame on you! Well, I tell you, complete fool ?! I know perfectly well that the train here comes from the direction of the Veterans Avenue! So young and so shameless! ”This is how it happens in St. Petersburg and how it never happens in Moscow.

At the station "Komsomolskaya" - huge chandeliers. Heavy.
She was engaged in the school of young guide-interpreters at the House of Friendship of Peoples (1979). At the next field seminar, our teacher tells us:
“When tourists ask you questions like - how much this chandelier weighs, but you don’t know, say something approximate, in its estimation ...”

The story of how I met my wife ...
The beginning of September 1990. Just started classes. I then studied at MIEM in the first year, and, naturally, began to frame with fellow students ... In the end, my wife and I were on the subway. We sat on the bench for a long time, talked about something, even quarreled ...
Then the train approached, she decided, got up and got into the car ...
I stand next to the car and look at it ...
“The doors are closing shut” ...
And here she, through the roar of the arriving train, says the phrase, which has become a parable for us: “Young man, but would you like to take me?”
I look at the closing doors and understand the grandeur of the moment ...
I take a step forward ... I look at her ...
A twitching car takes us out of stupor, and I understand that the closed door of the subway car became an impenetrable membrane between my past and future life ...


