
         Adventure 550
             Part I
 Well, like the sign says: Welcome to the land of ADVENTURE 550, the
expanded version of Original Adventure.
 Here you are standing at the end of the road in a strange valley
outside a building. Go in the building and get the lamp, say PLUGH and
then PLOVER and voila! You're in the Plover Room wherein lies an
enormous emerald! Leave it for now and go northeast and turn your lamp
on. Congratulations for bringing light into the Dark Room! Pick up the
Pyramid and go south then turn your lamp off, say PLOVER and PLUGH again
and poof! You're back in the building. Drop the Pyramid, pick up the
keys and go outside. Go south until you come to the grate, unlock it and
go down. Go west and pick up the cage, then go west again and turn your
lamp on. Get the rod and write down the magic word you see here. Go
west, then west again. There's a cheerful little bird sitting here
singing! It's afraid of the rod, so drop the rod and get the bird. Then
pick up the rod again and go west to the pit room.
 Go down the stairs and then south. There's a huge gold Nugget here!
Even though the legend on the wall says "You won't get it up the
stairs!", we're going to trick 'em! So pick it up and go north then
west. You've come to a fissure that's too wide to jump. But don't
despair, just wave your rod. Aha! It must be a magic wand because
there's now a crystal bridge spanning the fissure. Go west across the
bridge and pick up those Diamonds! (This place is lousy with treasure,
isn't it?) Go east back across the bridge, east again and go down the
stairs. There's a fierce snake here baring the way! Free the bird. The
cheerful little bird is a real trooper and runs the snake off in a
furry of feathers. Having now served its purpose, the bird and the cage
can be left here.
 Now's a good time to tell you about the dwarf and the axe. Somewhere
along the way, a little dwarf's going to curse at you, throw an axe and
run away.Get the axe and keep it with you until your lamp runs out of
power. This axe will save you from the dwarf and his friends.
 Now we're off to collect some more treasure. Go south and get the
Jewelry you see here, then go north and west and get the coins. About
now, you're pretty well loaded down, so we going to go and dump our
treasures. Go east and north, then north again to the Y2 room. At random
times, you'll hear a hollow voice say "Plugh". This is another magic
word and should be written down. Turn your lamp off and say PLUGH.
You're back in the building again. Drop the Nugget, Diamonds, Coins and
Jewelry, say PLUGH again and turn your lamp back on.
 Now, go south and get the silver bars, south again and northeast. Pick
up the jewel-encrusted Helmet and go south. Now go northwest and then
east. There's a little mushroom growing on the wall. This mushroom is
magical in nature. Whenever you eat it, your muscles bulge to huge
proportions and you become much stronger. Even though you've eaten the
mushroom, from time to time on a purely random basis, the mushroom will
grow back. It's a good idea to check this room every so often to see if
the mushroom's back. If it is, just pick it and carry it with you. If
you run into a situation where you can't carry anything more, eat the
mushroom and you should be able to carry three or four more items.
 Okay, eat the mushroom and go south, then go north. There's a little
vial of oil here. Pick it up, but whatever you do, don't drop it
anywhere because it's highly explosive! Now go north and south then up
the stairs. Go east and my, my! There's a softly humming sword plunged
deep into a rock here! Get the sword (you're strong enough since you've
eaten the mushroom, right?) and go west, back down the stairs and then
go southeast, north and north again. No treasures here, but there is a
magic word (even though it doesn't look like it!). The word is
MELENKURION. Write it down on your list and go south three times. Then
go north twice back to Y2. Turn your lamp off (got to conserve energy,
don't we?) and PLUGH yourself back to the building. Drop the Helmet and
Silver Bars, get the bottle and food, PLUGH back to Y2, turn your lamp
back on, and go south. Now we're going to delve deeper into the bowels
of this cave. So, chin up and look lively!
  This walkthru is copyrighted
     1984 by Barbara Baser



         Adventure 550
            Part II
 Down through the hole we go (watch your head!) and drop the rod. There
are several rooms in the lower levels of the cave that you can go to
directly just by saying its name. The BEDQUILT room is one of them. So
say BEDQUILT and there you are.
 Now, we're going to another of these rooms, so say SLAB. You're now in
the Slab Room. Go south. This is the Two-Pit Room, named thusly because
there are two pits here. There is also a hole 25 feet above your head
that you can't possibly reach...yet! Go down into the pit. There's a
tiny little plant here murmuring "water...water". Pour the water from
the bottle onto the plant. It spurts into furious growth for a few
seconds and is now bellowing for more water (greedy, isn't it?).
 Well, let's appease its demand. Go up and west back to the Slab Room.
Look up...there's a hole in the ceiling so go up. You're in a strange
north/south canyon. Go north and north again to the underground
reservoir and fill your bottle with water. Then go south, south again
and back down to the Slab Room. Go south and down into the pit and pour
more water on the plant. Shooom! It's now 25 feet tall and reaches all
the way up to that pesky hole you couldn't reach before! But don't climb
it yet. Go up and east then down into this new pit. There are oily pools
everywhere! Fill your bottle with oil, go up, west, down and now climb
the beanstalk.
 There's a tunnel here, so go west. A giant has unwisely left a nest of
Golden Eggs here! Also, note the legend on the wall..."FEE, FIE, FOE,
FOO [sic]" (foo?). Anyway, leave the eggs, write these words down and go
north. You've come to an old, rusty door. Weren't you clever to bring
some oil! Oil the door and drop the bottle, food, and keys. Now, go back
south then go east. There was a cave-in here, but you just manage to
squeeze through the debris by going north...only to confront a very
angry, hungry looking ogre! Throw the sword at the ogre. The sword flies
through the air singing something Wagnerian in nature, as if it knows
what it must do...and neatly slices the ogre to ribbons! But the battle
was too much for it and your contralto companion now lies in a puddle of
metal. But, cooling rapidly, you notice that it has become a Ring
wrought from the finest Mithril! Get the Ring and go north.
 You've entered the Sorceror's Lair. Upon one wall is carved "NOSIDE
SAMOHT". It looks vaguely familiar, doesn't it? Write these two words
down and go east. You're standing on the brink of a strange, bottomless
pit with paths leading east, west and north. First, we're going to go
east. The path stops here but you notice a crack heading northeast then
follow the path southeast. There's a path leading farther south here,
but it's covered with slime that seems to know you're here! It looks
like it would devour you if you tried to go south now! Throw the little
vial at the slime. Look! The slime shrivels up, turns black and finally
disappears!
 The way is now clear for you to continue, so go south, then south
again. You've entered a small, shelved room. Upon one of the shelves is
an open casket filled with rare Black Opals! Get the opals and go back
north twice, then west and southwest back to the path. Now, go north and
west. Again, the path ends, but you can enter the southeast crack. You
enter it and find yourself in the Ice Room. Go east down the ice slide.
 Brrrrr! Are your teeth chattering? They should be because you've
entered the Ice Caverns and there's only two ways you can go...south and
northwest. The slide you came down is unclimable, so it's off into the
Ice Mazes. The southern path is a dead-end, so go northwest and don't
lose your way! Now, go west, south, west, north, northwest, west twice
and south twice. You've come to a niche wherein an intricate Crystal
Sculpture of a Pig rests! Get the sculpture and go north twice. Now go
northwest, west, south, northwest twice, west twice and northwest.
Believe it or not, you've spelled out a magic word with all this
meandering! But more importantly, you have entered a room with a sign
floating in midair which states, rather unpretentiously, "this way out".
The magic word you spelled out in the Ice Maze is "THURB". Say THURB and
also write it down on your list of magic words. Poof! You're back at the
top of the slide that started all this. So go northwest and north.
You're now standing on the brink of the pit again. Go north, west, and
south until you get back to the Giant's Room. But don't touch the eggs
yet. (Patience, patience!)
 It's time to dump our treasures now, so go south and down the
beanstalk, then go up and west to the Slab Room. Now go back up through
the hole...we're going to take a shortcut, and I hope we don't run into
anything nasty on the way! Go south (gulp!), sorry about this...there's
a fierce, green dragon baring further progress! It's also lying on a
rather handsome looking Persian carpet! Kill the dragon! What? With my
bare hands??? Yes! Why not? Well, I'll be darned, you did it! Get the
rug (leave the teeth for now) and go east, then east again. You're back
in the Hall of the Mountain King! Go north twice to the Y2 Room, turn
your lamp off and PLUGH yourself back to the building. Drop the Opals,
Sculpture, and Rug.
  This walkthru is copyrighted
     1984 by Barbara Baser


         Adventure 550
            Part III
 By now, you may have heard some rustling noises in the darkness behind
you. That noise is the Pirate following you around, just waiting for you
to pick up a treasure he can steal! Let him! But as soon as he does, get
back to the Hall of the Mountain King. From here, we'll go into his maze
and wind our way through the rooms and locate not only the treasure he's
stolen, but his Treasure Chest as well!

 Ready? Okay...from the Hall of the Mt. King, go west three times, then
east and south into the hole. You are now in a Maze of Twisty Little
Passages All Alike. So follow me closely and don't get lost! Go east,
south three times, north and east. You should be on the brink of a pit.
Now go north, east and northwest. You have located the Pirate's Den!
Take his Chest and any treasures he's taken from you and go southeast,
west and south back to the Brink of the Pit. Go down into the pit and go
east twice. Turn your lamp off and say XYZZY and you're back in the
building! Drop your treasures and the Chest. You can't open the chest,
so don't bother with it. Now PLUGH yourself back to Y2 and turn your
lamp back on.
 Now south and back down into the hole and get the rod. Say BEDQUILT
then SLAB. Go south and down into the pit. Now climb the beanstalk and
go west back to the Giant's Room. Not yet...leave the eggs. Go north
then north again through the door. You've discovered a beautiful cavern
with a waterfall ending in a whirlpool. But better yet, you've found a
Jeweled Trident! Get the Trident and go back south three times and back
down the beanstalk. Go up, west and north back to Bedquilt. Now go east
to Complex Junction and go north. There's an enormous clam laying here!
Open the clam. Goodness! A huge lusterous pearl rolls out and downhill.
It was an oyster all along! Okay, go down twice to the cul-de-sac and
get the pearl, then go up twice back to the oyster room.
 Now go up and east. The passage looks kind of damp here...and well it
should for it's actually a patch of quicksand! But, it seems to me
you're pretty good at building bridges with that wand of yours. So wave
the rod. Even though nothing obvious happens, in reality, a bridge has
been built across the quicksand, so go east, north, then north and
southwest. Turn your lamp off for this area is lit by the light of three
(three?) moons! Go down the stairs to the beach. Look! There's a dinghy
with a bag of pieces of eights here! Get the bag and go back up the
stairs, go west and turn your lamp back on. Now go northwest and east.
Then go south. Well, Davey Jones' Locker! There's a finely carved
spyglass here! Get the spyglass and go north, west then south. Hmmm,
that path looks damp again! Well, no matter, just wave the rod and go
west over the patch. Go west then down back to the Oyster Room, then
south back to Complex Junction. Well, let's go deposit some more
treasures, so go up, east, up and north to Y2. Lights off! PLUGH back to
the building and drop all your treasures (except the ring). PLUGH and
turn the lights back on. Go south and down through the hole. Pop back to
BEDQUILT, then to the Slab room and south and down into the pit. Climb
the beanstalk and go west into the Giant's Room. Go north twice through
the door and drop the ring and the rod, but keep the lamp. Time to take
a dip, so go down (into the Whirlpool???). It's a good thing you dropped
everything because you manage to hold onto the lamp. The current's so
strong you'd have dropped everything else! You find yourself deposited
on the opposite shore of the reservoir. You see a huge gong hanging on
the wall and claw tracks leading into the lake. Go north and northeast.
You've found Ralph Witt's main treasure room! And look! Hanging loose
over the balcony is a string of Indian Turquoise Beads! Get the beads
and go west and south back to the lake shore. Now what? How do you plan
on crossing this lake? You could wait for Jacques Cousteau or...say!
What about the gong? Hit the gong and look! There's a huge tortoise here
with "I'm Darwin - Ride Me!" written on its back. Well, when in
Rome...ride on the turtle's back and wonder of wonders, he glides into
the water and takes you back to the southern shore of the reservoir and
disappears back into the depths of the lake.
 Go back south three times and get the dragon's teeth, then go east
twice and north twice to Y2...lights off and PLUGH. Drop the beads and
PLUGH back to Y2, lights on, south and down into the hole. Go to
Bedquilt, then Slab, then south and down. Climb the beanstalk, west and
get the Eggs (finally!). Now go north and get the food and keys, then go
north, get the rod and the ring and go west. Now go down the slide to
the Low Room. From here go southwest, then up.
 You've come to a deep chasm and a rickety bridge crossing it. Also you
have encountered a troll who demands that you throw him a treasure
before you cross. Throw him the Eggs (they're retrievable). He scurries
away clutching the eggs, leaving the bridge unattended. Cross the bridge
and go northeast, east and drop the keys and the food. Go northeast and
east. You've found some very rare Spices! Get the spices and go west and
north. Turn your lamp off because you've found a breathtaking view...the
area is dimly light by the fires of a monstrous underground volcano and
you can see across the volcano a valley. It's bridge building time
again, so wave your rod and drop it. A bridge spans the volcano from rim
to rim. Make sure you have your ring with you and cross the bridge. Now
go north to the wall.
 A huge, bull-like figure gazes down at you with a distinctly amused
look on its face. It seems to be daring you to discover the means of
entrance to its land. Believe it or not, you know the name of the tool
to use...right! It's your old friend, MELENKURION! So say MELENKURION
and magically three great crevices appears at the base of the statue!
  This walkthru is copyrighted
     1984 by Barbara Baser



         Adventure 550
            Part IV
 Go northeast and turn your lamp back on; then go north and northwest.
There's a beautiful Jade Bracelet is lying here. Get the Jade and go
east. Uh oh...all of a sudden out of seemingly empty space appear a
horde of nasty little gooseberry goblins with sharp nasty teeth. They're
screaming and yelling at you in a most threatening manner. It seems
somewhere in the back of your mind that you recall something about an
army growing from dragon's teeth! Throw the teeth and before you appears
an army of skeletons who frighten the goblins away, turn and salute you
then disappear before you can thank them. Go northeast and get the
flask. Don't open it yet, though! Now go south twice and northwest back
to the main entrance.
 Go northwest into the Fog Room. You're warned that to go farther into
the Fog could be disasterous, but you're not going to let a little fog
stop you, are you? Of course not! So go north and...oh my, lost in the
fog. I'm sure you've heard it before, but the worse thing to do when
you're in a fog is to have a light lit, so turn your lamp off. Look!
There in the distance...a barely visible light can be seen. Since the
direction is purely random, you'll have to head for it yourself.
 When you reach the light you find yourself in a room with a dark
passage leading down. So go down and turn your lamp back on. Lo and
behold! You've found the Ruby Yacht of Omar Khayyam! Get the yacht and
go north. You're in the Pentagram room. Put the flask on the Pentagram
and open it. All of a sudden an 12-foot tall djinn appears before you.
But luckily, you have him trapped within the confines of the Pentagram.
He offers to give you some help if you'll only release him from the
Pentagram. Do so and he gives you a history lesson about Ralph Witt and
his hatred of the order of the alphabet because his last name (Witt)
places him at the bottom of things. Now go north and up. The djinn
appears again and gives you a magic word: PHUGGG. Then the djinn
disappears again never to appear again. But don't worry, you've gotten
everything from him that you need. Now, go up the chimney, then south
and down. Voila! You're back at the beginning of the Fog Room. (Whew!
Aren't you glad you didn't have to find your way back through that
pea-soup?) Go south.
 Somewhere about now you should be getting "lamp getting dim" messages.
Keep on going until your lamp runs completely out of power. Don't panic,
though, just drop the lamp and say NOSIDE SAMOHT (remember him?) and
before you know it, a blue aura appears around your lamp and it suddenly
is recharged! Pick it up and keep going.
 Go north three times being careful not to step on the sleeping
Basilisk. Go down the spiral stairs twice then go north. You've found
another Y2 Room. Don't do anything silly like trying PLUGH or PLOVER
here because it's extremely dangerous trying to get down from a platform
suspended 2000 feet above a raging volcano! You are about to enter a
series of Enchanted Caverns. Once you enter them, you must go through
the entire maze before you can exit them. So pay close attention to the
directions that follow:
 Go west, south, southwest, northwest, south, down, west, northwest,
north, south, north and east. Turn your lamp off because you've entered
a highly polished Royal Audience Hall and light emanates from an unseen
source. Go east again to the throne and pay your respects to the remains
of an unusual being. Sitting on the throne is the skeleton of the ruler
of this strange land. In its hand is a beautiful Sapphire Sceptre! As
you take the sceptre, the ghost of the skeleton seems to pervade the
hall. It gazes at you and warns you to remember a magic word then
disappears. Write down this magic word. In order to complete the game
successfully, you'd have to play this portion five times; but in order
to save you time, the possible magic words are: KLAETU, KNERL, BLERBI,
SNOEZE and ZORTON. Whichever word the ghost says to you, remember it;
but write all the words down on your list of words.
 Time to leave, so go west then west again and turn your lamp back on.
Now go southwest, east, southeast, northeast, east, southeast, down,
south and north. At last...you've come back to the Y2 Room. Go south and
down to the Storage room and get the plate you see here. Then go up the
stairs three times then north to the Peelgrunt Room. A massive safe
takes up an entire wall, but it doesn't have a dial, keyhole, handle or
any means to open it. It must be a magic safe! Aha! The magic word the
skeleton said to you! Say the word and the safe creeks open (it was
quite rusty). Enter the safe. Suspended in mid-air is a luminous crown!
Drop all the treasures here, exit the safe and close the door. (Don't
drop the plate, though!) Then head back south towards our sleeping
friend. Unfortunately, the Basilisk isn't such a heavy sleeper after all
and wakes with a roar. Luckily you're carrying the plate, and catching
sight of itself in the mirror-like finish on the plate, it turns itself
into a stone statue! Whew! That could've been you! Drop the plate and go
back south to the entrance.
  This walkthru is copyrighted
     1984 by Barbara Baser


         Adventure 550
             Part V
 Turn your lamp off since you have plenty of light to see where you're
going and go back south across the bridge and south again. Turn your
lamp back on and go south, pick up the keys and the food, go southeast
and south. You're outside a room with a sign over the door that reads
"CAUTION! BEAR IN ROOM!" Say BARREN and you're inside the room with a
ferocious looking bear chained to the wall with a golden chain. Good
thing you have something to give the bear, so feed it the food and it
becomes quite tame! Unlock the chain and get it and the bear and drop
the keys. Exit the room and go up, north, west and west.
 You've returned to the bridge and the Troll is nowhere in sight. As
soon as you try to cross the bridge, though, the Troll steps out from
underneath the bridge and the greedy little beggar demands yet another
treasure as a toll! Free the bear. The bear goes lumbering toward the
Troll, who lets out a frightened yell and makes tracks for who knows
where! The bear ambles back towards you, but leave it here. If you try
to take it across the bridge, it's entirely possible you'd both perish!
Wave goodbye to the bear and cross the bridge.
 Time to retrieve your eggs from the troll. Type each of the words you
saw on the Giant's Room Wall separately (i.e. FEE...then FIE...then FOE,
etc.) After you've typed in FOO, you should receive the message "DONE!".
If you didn't, then try it again. Go southwest, down and southeast.
You're in the Oriental Room and a delicate Ming Vase is sitting here!
Leave it just now and go north then west. You've come to an alcove with
a tight squeeze into a tunnel heading east.
 In order to get into the tunnel, you'll have to drop everything (yes,
everything!) you're carrying. Do so and go east. At last! The first
treasure you saw in the game! An enormous Emerald is here! Get the
emerald and go west and pick up everything you dropped. Now go northwest
and south and get the Vase, then go southeast and east. There's a velvet
pillow laying here. Get it and go west three times and down into the
pit. One last time up the beanstalk, west and get the Eggs. Then south
and down. Go up and west then up and south, east, east and north twice
to Y2 (the real one, this time!). Turn your lamp off and PLUGH back to
the building. Drop the pillow first BEFORE you drop the vase! If you
drop the vase first, it smashes into a thousand delicate pieces all over
the ground and is worthless! Now drop the rest of your treasures
including the ring this time, PLUGH and turn your lamp back on. Go south
twice then down.
 Imagine that! There's a safe here that's a complete double for the one
you found in the Peelgrunt Room! Use the same magic word on this safe as
you did on the other and enter the safe. Here are all the treasures you
placed in the other safe. Hmmm...this must be the exact same safe!
Obviously, it had two entrances all along! Get the treasures, exit the
safe and close it. Go up the stairs and north back to Y2. Lights out and
PLUGH back to the building and drop this load of treasures. Right now
all you should be carrying is the lamp. So PLUGH, lights on, go south
and down. Go to Bedquilt and keep going down until you arrive at the
Witt's Construction area. You'll see several Spelunker Magazines laying
here. You can't read them, but you must deliver them! Get the magazines
and go east to Witt's End. Drop the magazines and keep going east until
you get outside.
 Now's the tricky part. You must wander around until you receive the
"CAVE CLOSING - PLEASE EXIT!" message. Start making your way back to Y2.
If you've retrieved all the treasures you shouldn't be able to get
there. Eventually, you will be deposited in a sealed cylindrical room in
a puff of orange smoke. You will be completely empty-handed. There will
be no obvious exits. The only way out is via magic. Remember that list
of magic words you've been writing down all this time? Now they become
extremely important and useful!
 When you opened the flask in the pentagram room, the djinn told you two
things. The first was the magic word PHUGGG; the second was a brief
history lesson regarding Ralph Witt and his desire to reverse the
alphabet...hmmm! Is there something to this? Yes, indeedy! All those
magic words you've accumulated should now be typed in in reverse
alphabetical order! Start with ZORTON and work your way down to BLERBI.
You should have 16 magic words in all. The complete list and order is:
 ZORTON, XYZZY, THURB, SNOEZE, SAMOHT, PLUGH, PHUGGG, NOSIDE,
MELENKURION, KNERL, KLAETU, FOO, FOE, FIE, FEE, and BLERBI.
 If you mess up the order of the words, you must start at ZORTON again.
 When you have successfully typed the words in, you should be -Poofed-!
back to the end of a road in a strange valley outside a building. Look
familiar? If you go into the building and try PLUGH, it doesn't seem to
work here! That's strange...it all looks the same...or does it?!? Go
south down the road toward the grate. But this time, when you get to the
slit where the water is entering, instead of a 2-inch slit, you see a
2-foot slit! Go down the slit.
 You are sucked down, down, down into the very depths of the earth in
complete darkness! Just when you think you're going to die from lack of
oxygen, you find yourself in a brightly lit treasure room. Look, it's
all the things you've seen during your adventure: But instead of
monsters and threatening creatures, you find smiling gooseberry goblins,
the troll and basilisk are smiling at you benignly, friendly dwarves
wave you in!
 Congratulations! Hope you had a "grate" time solving this adventure!
  This walkthru is copyrighted
     1984 by Barbara Baser


