5/29/2019

A Guide to Russian Sects and Fringe Beliefs - Part One, The Schism and the Skoptsy - Sputnik International

Sputnik International
SEARCH

【公式HP】IT導入補助金
2019

IT導入補助金・ものづくり補助金・小規模事業者
持続化補助金が一体となりIT化を推進します！

IT導入補助金2019

BREAKING: Iran Ready for Possibility of War With US, But Calls for Start of
Dialogue - Foreign Ministry

RUSSIA

A Guide to Russian Sects and Fringe
Beliefs - Part One, The Schism and the
Skoptsy
RUSSIA

18:38 29.05.2009

In
this six-part series, RIA Novosti takes a look at the history of some of Russia's sects and
Our website uses cookies to improve its performance and enhance your user experience. Through
cookies,
certain personal
data isasks
collected
and
maycountry
be stored temporarily.
Yousuch
can change
your
cookie for theACCEPT
& CLOSE
their leaders,
and also
why
the
has proved
fertile
ground
growth
settings through your browser. More info: Privacy Policy
of new and bizarre beliefs.
MOSCOW, (RIA Novosti's Marc Bennetts) - Russia has seen a colossal number of sects and fringe religions
throughout its long history, from the 18th-century self-castrating Skoptsy to the modern-day doomsday cult
whose members threatened to burn themselves alive in the Volga Region last year.
In this six-part series, RIA Novosti takes a look at the history of some of these groups and their leaders, and
also asks why Russia has proved such fertile ground for the growth of new and bizarre beliefs.
Up until the mid 17th century, the Russian Orthodox Church enjoyed complete spiritual authority. However,
in 1666, Patriarch Nikon decided to bring the Russian Church in line with Greek Orthodoxy, and ordered the
rewriting of ecclesiastical tomes.
His move, in a country where dogma and tradition had always played a large role in religious life, caused an
uproar.

https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090529155121673/

1/4

5/29/2019

A Guide to Russian Sects and Fringe Beliefs - Part One, The Schism and the Skoptsy - Sputnik International

Nikon's assertion that Orthodox believers should use three ngers instead of two to cross themselves led to
him being labeled the Antichrist by opponents of his changes. Pious Russians had long feared the year 1666,
with its satanic associations, and Nikon's actions seemed to them to be a sign that the Apocalypse was fast
approaching.
The Old Believers subsequently ed to Siberia and other remote areas of Russia to escape persecution and
await the end of the world. Some of the groups cut themselves o so e ectively that isolated communities
that knew little of developments in the modern world were still being found in the 1960s and 1970s by Soviet
geological expeditions.
This 17th century rejection of the Church's authority laid the roots for a subsequent explosion of sects and
cults, many of them xating on a single piece of scripture, or an interpretation of scripture, and basing their
entire belief system around it.
The two most notorious of these cults were the Khlysty and their o shoot, the Skoptsy.
The Khlysty believed that the way to salvation lay through the repentance of sins. The greater the sin, the
greater the repentance, the Khlysty reasoned, and following this logic they rejected conventional doctrines of
"right and wrong," indulging in actions that they could later confess to.
Grigory Rasputin, the mysterious monk who had a major in uence on Tsar Nicholas II prior to the 1917
Bolshevik Revolution, is also thought to have had links to the group, which was active from the 17th to the
early 20th century.
"I whip myself, I seek Christ" ("Sebya khlyschu, Khrista ischu") the Khlysty chanted, while agellating
themselves. They were also famed for their dervish-like dances, during which they believed they were
communicating directly with the Holy Spirit.
From the Khlysty came the Skoptsy, who believed that Adam and Eve were created sexless, and that
reproduction organs only appeared after humanity had been tempted by Satan. Accordingly, in order "to
avoid sexual temptation and sin" the group's men castrated themselves. Just to be on the safe side, they also
cut o women's breasts.
The sect also distorted biblical texts, referring to Christ not as the redeemer (iskupitel) but the castrator
(oskopitel), and stated that Jesus had himself been relived of his sexual organs by John the Baptist.
The late Russian academic Andrei Sinyavsky claimed in "Ivan the Fool - Russian Folk Belief" that the Skoptsy
believed that anyone who castrated twelve people was guaranteed a place in heaven, irrespective of any
other sins he may have committed. Soviet dissident Sinyavsky, in his quite remarkable study of Russian
religious history, wrote that they even went so far as to pay peasants to let them "strike o the serpent."
The sect's leader and founder, Kondraty Selivanov, considered by his many followers to be a castrated Tsar
Peter III, despite the latter's assassination in 1762, was granted an audience with a curious Tsar Paul I
towards the end of the 18th century. Predictably, the Russian leader turned down Selivanov's proposal that
he castrate himself and establish the Skoptsy belief as state religion, packing him o to an insane asylum
instead.

https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090529155121673/

2/4

5/29/2019

A Guide to Russian Sects and Fringe Beliefs - Part One, The Schism and the Skoptsy - Sputnik International

Despite Paul I's unwillingness to embrace the group's teachings, the in uence of the Skoptsy grew and by
1863 o cial state statistics showed that the group was some 110,000-strong. The Khlysty were also said to
boast similar numbers.
While the Khlysty and the Skoptsy were the most notorious of the new sects, they were not the only ones.
Other sects included the Molokans (known for their habit of drinking milk on fast days), the Dukhobors
(Spirit-Wrestlers) and the Beloritzy (who only wore white), to name but a few.
Although these groups have largely ceased to exist, their rejection of the mainstream Church had a massive
in uence on Russian religious life, and paved the way for the appearance of the myriad modern-day sects
and cults that emerged following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
M.bennetts@rian.ru
The opinions expressed in this article are the author's and may not correspond to those of RIA Novosti.

You May Like

Promoted Links by Taboola

Градостроительная игра которая позволяет тебе играть сквозь века
Кузница Империй | Играй Бесплатно [16+]

Бесплатная профориентация для старшеклассников
Maximum [16+]

Дона® действует на причину боли в суставах. Оригинальный препарат!
Дона [16+]

A Tale of True Love Between Golden Retrievers

Rise and Shine: Little Golden Retriever Pup Can't be Stopped

Thrilled & Glee Golden Retriever Surprises Owner As He Returns Home

.
WATCH: Chinese Air Force Jet Flies into Ground, Explodes

https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090529155121673/

3/4

5/29/2019

A Guide to Russian Sects and Fringe Beliefs - Part One, The Schism and the Skoptsy - Sputnik International

Little Devil: Annoyed Golden Retriever Pup Bites Mother

We Were Born to Make You Happy: Golden Retriever Puppies Huddle in a Box

Community standards

DISCUSSION

COMMENT VIA FACEBOOK

0 Comments

COMMENT VIA SPUTNIK

Sort by Oldest

Add a comment...

Facebook Comments Plugin

© 2019 Sputnik. All rights reserved

https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090529155121673/

4/4

