The In the spring of 1994 I 1 k 1 ringing cedar chartered three riverboats on which ried out a threemonth expedition on the River Novosibirsk to Salekhard and back to foster economic ties Ob The aim of the in Siberia I car from expedition was with the regions of the Russian Far North The expedition went under the name of The Merchant Convoy The largest of the three riverboats was a passenger ship named the Lumumba Western Siberian riverboats bear rather interesting names the Maria Ulyanova the Patrice Lumumba the Mikhail Kalinin as if there were no other personages in history worth comPatrice 1 memorating The lead ship Patrice Lumumba housed the expedition headquarters along with a store where local Siberian entrepreneurs could exhibit their wares The plan was for the convoy to travel north 3500 kilometres visiting not only major ports of call such as Tomsk Nizhnevartovsk KhantyMansiysk and Salekhard but smaller places goods could be unloaded only during a brief 2 as well summer where navigation season The convoy would dock at a populated settlement during the daytime We would offer the wares we had brought for sale and hold talks about setting up regular economic links Our travelling was Maria Ulyanova Ulyanova nee a name borne by two Lenin founder of the Lenins sister the ship has since Lumumba 19251961 formed the ship is historical figures first been renamed the Viktor Gashkov Emery elected government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo the Mikhail Ivanovich Kalinin 1 8751946 of the Soviet National Executive Committee the USSRs still Patrice Communist leader ofthe Mouvement National Congolais who now known as the Paris the Kalinin Maria Alexandrovna mother to Vladimir Ilich Ulyanov aka Vladimir Soviet Union and Maria Ilinichna Ulyanova 18781937 Blank 18351916 retains its original as Chairman first titular Head of State name The metric system of measures is used throughout 3 500 kilometres One kilometre equals approximately six tenths 06 of a mile the book Book i Anastasia 2 done conditions were unfavourable for would put into the nearest port and we would organise onboard parties for the local young people Most usually at night If weather navigation the lead ship places offered little in the and community centres way of their own socalled Houses of Culture ing downhill ever since the collapse of the Clubs entertainment USSR and had been go there were al most no cultural activities available Sometimes we might go for twentyfour hours or more without seeing a single populated place even the tiniest the river around the only transportation artery for From village many the only thing visible to the eye was the taiga3 kilometres I itself was not yet aware at the time that somewhere amidst the uninhabited vastness of forest along the riverbank a surprise meeting was await me one that was to change my whole life One day on our way back to Novosibirsk I arranged ing lead ship at a small village one with only a few houses at thirty or forty kilometres distant I dock the best some to from the larger population centres planned a threehour stopover so the crew could have shore leave buy some of our goods and foodstuffs and we could cheaply pick up from them fish and wildgrowing plants and the of the local residents could taiga During our stopover time approached by two of the time The as the leader of the expedition I was local senior citizens as I judged at the one of them appeared to be somewhat older than the other two a wisened fellow with a long grey beard elder of the kept silent the whole time leaving his younger companion to do the talking This fellow tried to persuade me to lend him fifty of my crew which numbered no more than sixtyfive in total to into the taiga about twentyfive kilometres or so go with them from the dock where the ship was berthed They would be taken into the depths of the taiga to cut taiga the Russian down a tree he described as name given to the boreal forest that stretches across and northern Canada The word sivir meaning land world or tribe Siberia cedar Russian kedr a ringing cedar Siberia is 4 5 The much of derived from an Old Tungus word in this case and throughout the book referring to either the Siberian pine Siberian cedar Pinus sibirica or to the Lebanese cedar Cedrus libant The ringing cedar cedar 3 which he said reached forty metres in height needed to be cut up into pieces which could be carried by hand he said definitely take the whole lot The recommended old fellow further to the ship that each piece be cut Each of us should keep one into smaller pieces We must up for himself and give the rest to relatives friends and anyone who wished to accept a piece as a gift He said this was a most unusual cedar The piece should be worn on ones chest as a pendant Hang it around your neck while standing barefoot in the grass and then press it to your chest with the palm of your left hand It takes only a moment to feel the pleasing warmth emanating from the piece of cedar followed by a light tingling sensation running through the whole body From time to time whenever desired the side of the pendant facing away from the body should be rubbed with ones fingers the thumbs pressed against the other side The old fellow confidently assured me that within three months the possessor of one of these ringing cedar pendants will 5 feel significant improvement and in his sense of wellbeing will be cured of many diseases Even AIDS I asked and briefly explained what I had learnt about this disease from the press The oldster confidently replied From any and But this all diseases he considered was an easy task that anyone having one of these pendants more I successful and more benefit was kinder talented did know a little about the healing properties of the cedars of our Siberian taiga but the suggestion that and The main would become abilities it could affect ones feelings well that to me seemed beyond the bounds of prob ability The thought came to me that maybe these old men wanted money from me for this unusual cedar as they themselves called it And I began explaining that out in the big wide world women were used to wearing jewellery made of gold and a dime for some scrap of wood and so money for anything like 5 forty metres about and wouldnt pay wasnt going to lay out any that 131 feet system equal to 328 feet I silver The metre is the basic unit of length in the metric Book 4 Anastasia i They dont know what theyre wearing came the reply Gold well thats dust in comparison with one piece of this cedar But we dont need any money for it We can give you some dried mushrooms in addition but theres nothing we Not wanting need from you to start an argument out of respect for their age I said Well maybe someone will wear some of your cedar pendants They certainly would if a top woodcarving craftsman agreed to put hand to it and create something of amazing beauty To which the old fellow replied Yes you could carve it but it would be better to polish it by rubbing It will be a lot better if you do this yourself with your fingers his whenever your heart desires ful look to Then then the cedar will also have a beauti it the younger of the two quickly unbuttoned first his old and revealed what he was wearing on his chest I looked and saw a puffedout circle or oval It was multicoloured purple raspberry auburn forming some kind of puz worn jacket and then his shirt the veinlines on the wood looked like little streams I am not a connoisseur oiobjetsdart although from time to time I have zling design had occasion to visit picture galleries The worlds great masters had not called forth any particular emotions in me but the object hanging around this mans neck aroused significantly greater feelings and emotions than any of my visits to the Tretyakov Gallery How many years I have you been rubbing this piece of cedar asked Ninetythree the old fellow responded And how old are you A hundred and nineteen At the time I didnt believe him five Either he hadnt noticed attention to them In persuade me my He looked like a man of seventydoubts or if somewhat excited tones he he had he paid no started in trying to that any piece of this cedar polished Tretyakov Gallery by human fingers the foremost collection of Russian art in the world located in the centre of Moscow The original collector Pavel Tretyakov donated his extensive collection to the City of Moscow in 1892 it has been steadily increasing ever since The ringing cedar 5 Then it would start looking even better and better especially when worn by a woman The body of its wearer would give off a pleasant and beneficial alone would also look beautiful In just three years aroma quite unlike anything artificially produced by Man Indeed a very pleasant fragrance was emanating from both these old men I could feel it even though Im a smoker and like all smokers have a dulled sense of smell And there was one other peculiarity I suddenly became aware of phrases in the speech of these stran gers that were not common Some of them to the residents of this isolated part of remember to this day even the intonations associated with them Here is what the old fellow told me God created the cedar to store cosmic energy When someone Is in a state of love they emit a radiant energy the North It takes but a second for it I to reflect off the celestial bodies floating overhead and come back to Earth and give life to everything that breathes The Sun is one of those celestial bodies and it reflects but a tiny fraction of such radiance Only bright rays can travel into Space from Man on the Earth And only beneficial rays can be reflected from Space back to Earth Under the influence of malicious feelings Man can emit only dark These dark rays cannot rise but must fall into the depths of the Earth Bouncing off Its core they return to the surface in the form rays of volcanic eruptions earthquakes wars etc The culminating achievement of these dark rays Is their direct efon the Man originating them invariably exacerbating this Mans fect own malicious feelings hundred and fifty years old Day and night their millions of needles catch and store the whole spectrum of bright energy 7 During the period of the cedars life all the celestial bodies Cedars live to be five pass above them, reflecting this bright energy.
7 Trees indeed capture a wide range of radiation beyond visible light.
Man-made an- tennas are but an imitation of branching pattern in trees. Both the structure of trees and the materials composing them betray natural wave-receptors. Tree sap is a great conductor of electricity (this is why a tree hit by a lightning virtually explodes), and 6 Booki: Anastasia "Even in one tiny piece of cedar there is more energy beneficial to Man than in all the man-made energy installations taken together.
"Cedars receive the energy emanating from Man through Space, store it up and at the right moment when there is not enough of it give back.
They give back in Space — in other words, in Man — or in everything living and growing on the Earth.
"Occasionally though very rarely one discovers cedars that have been storing up energy but not giving back what they have After five hundred years of their they talk to us, life through their quiet ringing sound them and saw them up signal people to take to — This this is stored.
how how they make use of their what the cedars are asking with ringing sound. They keep on asking for three whole years. If stored-up energy on the Earth. This their they start to ring.
they don't have contact with living human beings, then in three years, deprived of the opportunity to give back what they have received and stored from Space, they lose their ability to give Man. Then they will start back directly to burning up the energy internally This tor- turous process of burning and dying lasts twenty-seven years.
"Not long ago we discovered a cedar like this. We determined that had been ringing for two years already It was ringing very softly Perhaps it is time, but trying to still, it draw out its request over a longer period of has only one year left.
It must be sawed up and given away to people." The old man spoke at length, and for some reason I heard him out.
The voice of this strange old Sibiriak* sounded at first quietly confident, then very excited, and when he got excited, he would rub the piece of cedar with his fingertips as though they were lightly tripping over some kind of musical instrument.
static electricity was For details please see Dr Ancient mysteries, modern (see footnote i in received from amber first visions: Chapter 16: The magnetic a fossil resin (see footnote 2 in Sibiriak — trees.
and of agriculture. Viktor Schauberger This statement 26: "Dreams corroborated by neer explorer of energy fields as the foundation of all o from conifer "Flying saucers? Nothing extraordinary!") referred to trees as "bioelectric condensers".
Lakhovsky Philip Callahan's books, including Tuning in to nature Dr Georges creating the future"), a pio- on the Russian word denoting a resident of Siberia.
a cellular level.
The ringing cedar It was cold on the riverbank.
An autumn wind was blowing across the river. Gusts ofwind ruffled the hair on the old men's capless heads, but the spokesman's jacket and shirt remained unbuttoned. His gertips kept rubbing the cedar pendant his chest, still fin- exposed to He was still trying to explain its significance to me.
Lidia Petrovna, 9 an employee of my firm, came down the gangplank to tell me that everyone else was already on board and waiting for me to finish my conversation. I bade farewell to the oldsters and quickly the wind.
climbed aboard.
I couldn't act their request for two reasons: delaying departure, especially for three days, would mean a significant financial loss.
to me, And besides, everything these old fellows said seemed at the time, to The next morning be in the realm of pure superstition.
during our usual company meeting I suddenly noticed that Lidia Petrovna was fingering a cedar pendant of her own. Later she would tell me that after I'd gone aboard she stayed behind for a while. She noticed that when started hurrying away from them, the oldster that had been talking with me stared after me with a perplexed look, and then said excitedly to his older companion: "Now how can that be? Why didn't they get it? I really don't know how to speak their language. I couldn't make them believe, I simply couldn't! Why? Tell me, Father!" The elder man put his hand on his son's shoulder and replied: "You weren't convincing enough, son!
They didn't grasp it." was going up the gangplank," Lidia Petrovna went on, "the old man that was talking with you suddenly rushed up to me, grabbed "As me by the arm, and led me back down to the grass below.
"He hurriedly pulled out of his pocket a string, and attached to it was this piece of cedar wood. He put it around my neck, and pressed it against my chest with the palm of both his hand and mine. I even felt a shiver go through my whole body. Somehow he managed to do all this very quickly, and I didn't even get a chance to say anything to him.
— Petrovna here is a patronymic, derived from her father's first name pronounce Tiotr'). The combination of the first name plus the patronymic is the standard form of formal address among business colleagues and acquaintances.
9 Lidia Petrovna (Petr, Book i: Anastasia 8 "As was walking away, he happy! Please called after come again next year!
Have a safe journey!' me: 'Have a safe journey! Be All the best, people!
Well be waiting for you!
4 As the waving away from the dock, the old fellow kept on and then all at once sat down on the ship pulled at us for a long time, was watching him through a pair of binoculars. The old man you and later gave me the pendant — I saw him sit down on the grass, and his shoulders were trembling. The older one with the long beard was bending over him and stroking his head." grass. I that talked with Amidst the flurry of my subsequent commercial dealings, accountkeeping and end-of-voyage farewell banquets I completely forgot about the strange Siberian oldsters.
Upon my return to Novosibirsk I was afflicted with sharp pains.
The diagnosis: a duodenal intestinal ulcer and osteochondrosis of the thoracic spine.
In the quiet of the comfy hospital ward bustle of everyday life.
nity to calmly reflect was cut off from the My deluxe private room gave me an opportu- on my four-month expedition and to draw up seemed as though my memory relegated just about everything that had happened to the background and for some reason the old men and what they said came to the forea business plan for the future. But it front of my thought.
requested to have delivered to me in the hospital all sorts of liter- on cedars. After comparing what I read with what I had heard, became more and more amazed and began to actually believe what the oldsters had said. There was at least some kind of truth in their words... or maybe the whole thing was true?!
In books on folk medicine there is a lot said about the cedar as a healing remedy They say that everything from the tips of the needles to the bark Is endowed with highly effective healing properties.
ature I The Siberian cedar wood has a beautiful appearance, and artistic The ringing cedar wood-carving masters enjoy great success in using for furniture soundboards for musical instruments. Cedar needles are highly capable of decontaminating the surrounding air. Cedar wood as well as has a distinctive, pleasant balsam fragrance.
A small cedar chip placed inside a house will keep moths away In the popular-science literature tive characteristics for the read was said that the qualita- northern cedars were significantly higher than for those growing in the south.
Back in 1792 the academician P. S. Pallas 10 wrote that the fruits of the Siberian cedar were effective in restoring youth and virility significantly increasing the body's ability to withstand a number of and diseases.
There a is whole host of historical phenomena Here rectly linked to the Siberian cedar.
one of them.
In 1907 a fifty-year-old semi-literate peasant 11 who directly or indi- named Gregory from an isolated Siberian village in an area where the Siberian cedar grows, found himself in St. Petersburg, the capital, and soon became a regular guest of the imperial family Not only did he amaze them with his predictions, but he possessed inRasputin, hailed credible sexual stamina. were struck by the 
At the time of his assassination, onlookers fact that despite his bullet-ridden body he continued to live. Perhaps because he had been raised on cedar nuts in a part of the country where cedars abound? This how contemporary journalist described his staying power: "At age fifty at noon and go on carousing From his fornication and drunken- he could begin an orgy until four o'clock in the morning.
ness he would go directly to the church for morning prayers and stand P. S. Pallas — a reference to Peter Simon Pallas (1741-1811), a German zoologist, As a member of paleontologist, botanist and ethnographer, born in St. Petersburg.
the St.
Petersburg Academy of Sciences, he was a prominent pioneer explorer of the Siberian taiga.
Gregory Efimovich Rasputin (i8yi?-i9i6; sources do not agree on the date of his birth) — a monk from the Tiumen region of Western Siberia who appeared to have unusual healing powers.
cially Nicholas' on He curried favour with the court of Tsar Nicholas I (espe- wife Alexandra Fedorovna) by demonstrating a beneficial influence their son (and heir to the throne) Alexei, who suffered from hemophilia.
Book i: Anastasia io praying until eight, before heading home for a cup of tea. Then, as nothing had happened, he would carry on receiving visitors until two in the afternoon. Next he would collect a group of ladies and if accompany them to the baths.
restaurant in the country, ous night's activities.
No From the baths he would be off to a where he would begin repeating the previnormal person could ever keep up a regime like that." The many-time world champion and Olympic champion wres12 Alexander Karelin, who has never been defeated so far, is also tler a Siberian, also strongman from an area where the Siberian cedar grows. This also eats cedar nuts.
A co-incidence?
mention only those facts which can be easily verified in popularwhich can be confirmed by witnesses. Lidia Petrovna, who was given the 'ringing cedar' pendant by the Siberian I science literature, or oldster, is now one of those witnesses.
She thirty-six years old, married with two children. Her co-workers have noticed changes in her behaviour. She has become kinder and smiles more often. Her husband, whom happen to know, told me that now He also their family has been experiencing a greater degree of mutual understanding.
remarked that his wife has somehow become younger-looking, and is starting to arouse greater feelings in possibly, But more him more respect and, quite love.
these multitudinous facts and evidences pale in compari- all son to the main point, which you can look up for yourself covery which has Bible.
God In the left me with not a trace of doubt Book of Leviticus teaches us how to houses, with the help After comparing of...
in the treat people, — and that Old Testament (Ch.
a disis 14, vs. 4), and even decontaminate their cedar!!!
the facts and data had gleaned from various was confronted by such a remarkable picture that all the to the world faded before it. The great mysteries that have excited people's minds began to pale into insignificance sources, miracles known AlexanderAlexandrovich Karelin (19 67-) — a Russian, European, Olympic and world champion wrestler many times over, undefeated in international competition from 1987 to 2000 (for most of this time not even giving up a point).
12 1 The ringing cedar comparison with the mystery of the ringing cedar. Now I could no longer have any doubts about its existence. They were all dispelled by the popular-science literature and the Old Vedic scripin was reading.
Cedars are mentioned forty-two times in the Bible, all in the Old Testament. 13 When Moses presented humanity with the Ten Commandments on stone tablets, he probably knew more than has been recorded in the Old Testament.
We are accustomed to the fact that in Nature there are various tures plants capable of treating human ills. The healing properties of the cedar have been attested in popular-science literature by such ous and authoritative researchers Old Testament consistent with the Academician Pallas, and seri- this scriptures.
And now, pay careful attention!
When the dar alone; nothing is Testament say that the cedar isting in is it Nature?
to be used?
talks about the cedar, said about other trees.
14 And it is just the ce- doesn't the Old the most potent medicine of any ex- What is this, anyway? A medicine kit? And how And why, out of all the Siberian cedars, did these strange old fellows point to a single 'ringing cedar'?
But that's not all.
Something immeasurably more mysterious lies this story from the Old Testament: King Solomon built a temple out of cedar wood. In return for the cedar from Lebanon, he gave another king, Hiram, twenty cities of his kingdom. Incredible! Giving away twenty cities just for some kind of building materials?! True, he got something else in return. At King Solomon's request he was given servants that were "skilled in behind felling timber".
What 15 kind of people were these?
What knowledge did they possess?
I3 In the Authorised (KingJames) Version of the English Bible, in cedars) I4 There are of course, separate references in the Bible to a oak, juniper), but not in conjunction with cedars.
I fact, the word cedar (or appears 75 times, from Leviticus to Zechariah.
Kings 5: 6 (New International Version).
number of trees (e.g., fir, Book i: Anastasia i2 have heard that even now, in the far-flung reaches of the taiga whose job it is to choose trees for construction.
But back then, over two thousand years ago, everybody might have there are old people known this. Nevertheless, specialists of sonie sort were required.
The temple was built. Services began to be held there, and... "the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud' 16 5.
What kind of a cloud was that? How and from where did it enter What could it have been? Energy? A spirit? What kind the temple?
of phenomenon, and what connection did The it have with the cedar?
old fellows talked about the ringing cedar as storing up some kind of energy.
Which cedars are stronger Academician — the ones in Lebanon or Siberia?
Pallas said that the healing properties of the cedars increased in proportion to their proximity to the forest tundra. In that case, then, the Siberian cedar It says in would be the stronger.
the Bible: "...by their fruits ye shall know them." 17 In other words, again the Siberian cedar!
Could it be that no one has paid any attention to Has no one put two and two together?
The Old Testament, all this?
the science of the past century and the cur- rent one — are all of the same opinion regarding the cedar.
And Elena Ivanovna Roerich 18 notes in her book Living ethics: "...a chalice of cedar resin figured in the rituals of the consecration of the kings of the ancient Khorassan. Druids also called the chalice of ce- dar resin the Chalice of Life.
alization of the spirit, was the Matth.
Elena result 8: ii 7: And only later, with the loss was it replaced by blood. The fire of the re- of Zoroaster of burning of the cedar resin in the chalice." 19 (Authorised King James Version).
(Authorised KingJames Ivanovna Roerich [Rerikh] Version).
(1879-1955) Russian religious thinker.
prominent Russian artist Nikolai Konstantinovich Roerich, she became fascinated with Oriental religions and devoted her career to studying and writing about them. In 1920 she and her husband founded the Agni Yoga Society, a non-profit educational institution in New York.
Travelling through Asia with her husband, the This translation taken from an English version of Roerich's Leaves of Morya's Garden, Book 2: Illumination (1925) — 2.4.18.
The ringing cedar how much So, then, 13 of our forebears' knowledge of the cedar, properties and uses has been passed its down to the present day?
possible that nothing has been preserved?
Is it What do the Siberian oldsters know about it?
And all at once my memory harked back to an experience of many years ago, didn't my which caused a shiver to run up and down it back then, but now...
spine.
pay any attention to During the early years of perestroika I Association of Siberian Entrepreneurs.
was president of the One day I got a call from we still had Communist Party committees and 'Executive Councils'), asking me to come to a meeting with a prominent Western businessman. He the Novosibirsk District Executive Council (back then had a of recommendation from the government of the day letter Several entrepreneurs were present, along with workers from the Executive Council secretariat.
The ^Western businessman' was of a rather imposing pearance — an unusual person with Oriental features.
external ap- He was wear- ing a turban, and his fingers were adorned with precious rings.
The discussion, as usual, centred around the possibilities for co- operation in various would fields.
The visitor said, among other things: "We buy cedar nuts from you." As he spoke these words, his face and body tightened, and his sharp eyes moved from side to side, no doubt studying the reaction of the entrepreneurs present. I like to remember the incident very well, as even then appearance had changed wondered why his like that.
After the official meeting the Moscow Interpreter accompanying him came up to me. She said he would like to speak with me.
The businessman made me a confidential proposal: If I could arrange delivery of cedar nuts for him -— and they had to be fresh — then I would receive a handsome personal percentage over and above the official price.
kind of oil.
some would think It over.
would find out for myself what kind of oil he was talk- nuts were to be shipped to Turkey for processing Into I decided ing about.
said And I did...
On the London market, which sets the standard for world prices, cedar nut oil fetches anywhere up to five hundred dollars per Book i: Anastasia i4 kilogram!
20 Their proposed deal would have given us approximately two to three dollars for one kilogram of cedar nuts.
I rang up an entrepreneur I happened to know in Warsaw, and asked him whether it might be possible to market such a product directly to the consumer, and whether we could learn the technology involved in extraction.
its A month later he sent me gain access to the technology powers so involved just to forget about After that a reply: And "No way We weren't able to besides, there are certain Western in these issues of yours that it would be better it." turned to my good scholar with our Novosibirsk friend, Consumer Konstantin Rakunov, 21 Co-operative Institute.
a I bought a shipment of nuts and financed a study And the laboratories of his institute produced approximately 100 kilograms of cedar nut oil.
I also tion hired researchers, who came up with the following informa- archival documents: Before the Revolution (and even for some time afterward) there was in Siberia an organisation known as the Siberian People from this organisation traded in They had rather swanky branch offices oil, Co-operator.
including cedar nut in Harbin, London and New 22 York and rather large Western bank accounts. After the revolution the organisation eventually collapsed, and many of its members went abroad.
A member of the Bolshevist government, Leonid Krasin, met with the head of this organisation and asked him to return to Russia.
2 kilogram — metric measure of weight, equal to approximately 2.2 pounds.
1 Konstantin Petrovich Rakunov (1954-), with a post-graduate degree in economics, holds the rank of docent (equivalent to Associate Professor) in the is Management what is now the Novosibirsk Consumer Co-operative University; he the author of a number of scholarly publications on consumer co-operatives.
Department In at fact, prior to the 1917 revolution Russian exports of cedar nut generated of all foreign-trade revenues, rivalling such commodities as grain, timber and 23 Leonid Borisovich Krasin (1870-1928) activist.
During the 1920s he served 10% furs.
an early Bolshevik and Communist Party as Foreign Trade minister as well as the government's trade representative in London and Paris.
new The ringing cedar But the head of the Siberian Co-operator replied that 15 he would be of more help to Russia if he remained outside its borders.
From archival materials I further learnt that cedar oil was made using wooden (only wooden!) presses in many villages of the Siberian taiga. The quality of the cedar oil depended on the season in which how they were processed. But I was unfrom the archives or the institute, exactly the nuts were gathered and able to determine, either which season was being indicated. The secret had been lost. There are no healing remedies with properties analogous to those of cedar oil. But perhaps the secret of making this oil had been passed along by one of the emigres to someone in the West? How was it possible that the cedar nuts with the most effective healing properties grow in Siberia, and yet the facility for producing the oil is located in Turkey?
After all, Turkey has no cedars like those found in Siberia.
And just what 'Western powers' was the Warsaw entrepreneur talking about? Why did he say it would be better just to forget about this issue? Might not these powers be 'smuggling' this product with extraordinary healing properties out of our Russian- Siberian Why, with such a treasure here at home with such effective known for centuries — for millennia, even, do we spend millions and maybe billions of dollars buying up foreign medicines and swallow them up like half-crazed people? How is it that we have lost the knowledge known to our forebears? Our recent taiga?
properties, a treasure forebears yet ones who lived in our century!
And what about the Bible's description of that extraordinary hapWhat kind of unknown pow- pening of over two thousand years ago?
ers are trying so earnestly to erase own memories? "Oh, ness!" we're told.
our forebears' knowledge from our you'd better stick to minding your Yes, they are trying to wipe out.
own busi- And, indeed, they are succeeding!
was seized by a fit of anger.
in our pharmacies, but single thirty-gram vial it is checked, and yes, cedar sold in foreign packaging!
and tried it.
oil is sold bought a actual oil content, think, was no more than a couple of drops — the rest was some kind of diluting agent. Compared to what was produced in the Consumer Cooperative Institute well, there was simply no comparison. And these diluted couple of drops cost fifty thousand roubles!
24 So what 16 we didn't buy it abroad, but sold it ourselves? Just the sale of this would be enough to raise the whole of Siberia above the poverty level! But how did we ever manage to let go of the technology of our if And here we are snivelling that we live like paupers...
forebears?!
Well, okay produce the think 111 myself I decided I would up north, using only come up with something all the same.
I'll my firm will only get wealthier.
second expedition along the Ob — and try a my headquarters ship, the Patrice back Lumumba. I loaded a variety of goods for sale into the hold, and turned the film- viewing room into a store.
decided to hire a new crew and not invite my firm's financial situation had worsened while I was distracted with my new interest.
Two weeks after leaving Novosibirsk my security guards reported anyone from my firm. As things stood, they had overheard conversations about the ringing cedar. And, in newly hired workers included some ^pretty strange their opinion, the people', to put bers to mildly began summoning individual crew mem- my quarters to talk about the forthcoming trek into the taiga.
Some of them even agreed for extra pay for agreed to when to go on a volunteer Others asked was not something they had for work. It was one thing to stay in the this operation, since signing basis.
comfortable conditions aboard ship — quite another to trek twentyfive kilometres into the taiga and back, carrying loads of wood.
finances at the time were already pretty tight.
selling the cedar.
away Besides, After all, had not planned on the oldsters had said it should be given my main interest was not the cedar tree itself, but the secret of how to extract the to find out I My oil.
And of course it would be fascinating the details connected with it.
by little, with the help of my security guards, I realised that there would be attempts made to spy on my movements, especially Little after I left the ship.
But for what purpose was unclear.
was behind the would-be spies? I And who thought and thought about decided that to be absolutely certain, would somehow have it, and to out- smart everyone at once.
fifty thousand roubles change rate — approximately 16 equivalent to 20% US dollars at the November 1994 of the average Russian's monthly income.
ex- Encounter tK"" Without a word to anyone, I arranged to have the ship stop not far from the place where I had met the old men the previous year. Then I took a small motorboat and reached the village. I gave orders to the captain to continue along the trade route.
hoped would be able, with the help of the local residents, to look up the two old fellows, see the ringing cedar with my own eyes and determine the cheapest way of getting it back to the the motorboat to a rock on the shore, the little houses close by But spotting a the riverbank, The woman had on an old how old this woman was.
"It here Tying one of standing alone on quilted jacket, long skirt and high rub- many backwoods during the spring and fall.
tied so that the forehead and neck were two old men woman for decided to approach her.
ber galoshes of the kind worn by tell just ship.
was about to head residents of the northern On her head was a kerchief fully covered. It said hello was hard to and told her about the had met here the previous year.
was my grandfather and great-grandfather who talked with you last year, Vladimir/' the woman replied.
was amazed. Her voice sounded very young, her diction was She called me by my first name and right off used the informal form of address. I couldn't remember the names of the I crystal clear.
1 whether we had introduced ourselves at all. I thought now we must have done so, since this woman knew my name. I asked oldsters, or her (deciding to continue in the same informal tone): 'And how do you call yourself?" informalform ofaddress — in Russian this means using the pronoun ty (and its gram- matical variants) in place of the oivous in French).
more formal vy (much the same as using tu instead 18 Booki: Anastasia woman answered, stretching out her hand toward though expecting me to kiss it.
of a country woman in a quilted jacket and galoshes, 'Anastasia", the me, palm down, This gesture as standing on a deserted shore and trying to act like a lady of the world, amused me no end.
shook her hand. Naturally, I wasn't going to kiss it. Anastasia gave me an embarrassed smile and suggested I go with her into the taiga, to where her family lived.
"The only thing is, well have to make our way through the twenty-five kilometres. That's not too "Well, of course, it's rather But can you show far.
taiga, much for you?" me the ringing cedar?" "Yes, can." "You know all about that, you'll tell me?" you what I know." "Then let's go!" Along the way Anastasia told me how their family, their kin, had been living in the cedar forest generation after generation — as her forebears had said, over the course of several millennia. It is only "I shall tell extremely rarely that they find themselves in direct contact with people from our civilised society These contacts do not occur in their places of permanent residence, but only when they come the villages under the guise of hunters or travellers from settlement. Anastasia herself had been to two big cities: into some other Tomsk and Moscow. But only for one day each. Not even to stay the night. She wanted to see whether she might have been mistaken in her perceptions about the lifestyle of city people. She had saved the money for the trip by selling berries and dried mushrooms. A local village woman had lent her her passport.
2 Anastasia did not approve of her grandfather and great-grandfather's idea of giving away the ringing cedar with its healing properties to a whole lot of people.
When asked why, she replied that the pieces of cedar would be scattered In all among passport good people.
would be snatched up by evildoers as well as probability the majority of the pieces — in this case, an internal identity document required for any kind of travel within the Russian Federation (or the former Soviet Union).
19 negative- thinking individuals. In the final analysis they might end up doing more harm than good.
ion, The most important thing, in her opin- was to promote the good.
And to help people through whom the good was accomplished. If everyone were benefited at random, the imbalance between good and evil would not be changed, but would stay the same or even get worse.
After my encounter with the Siberian oldsters looked through a variety of popular-science literature along with a host of historical and scholarly works describing the unusual properties of the cedar.
Now I was trying to penetrate and comprehend what Anastasia was saying about the lifestyle of the cedar people and thinking to myself: "Now what if anything can that be compared to?
thought about the Lykovs 3 miliar with lived a true story ? 5 many Russians are fa- from the account by Vasily Peskov of another family that an isolated life for many years in the in the paper Komsomolskaya taiga.
They were written up Pravda under the headline: "Dead-end in the taiga", and were the subject of television programmes.
mulated for myself an impression of the Lykovs people had for- who knew Nature pretty well, but had a rather fuzzy concept of our modern civilised life.
But this was a different situation. Anastasia gave the impres- sion of someone something who was perfectly acquainted with our life and with else besides that I couldn't ease discussing our city life, she fathom at all.
seemed to know it She was quite first-hand.
We walked along, getting deeper into the woods, and after about five kilometres stopped to kerchief and long she was wearing struck at what skirt, rest.
At this point she took off her jacket, and placed them in the hollow of a now was I saw. If I a short, light-weight frock.
were a believer in miracles, tree. All I was dumbwould put this down to something like extreme metamorphosis.
For now here before me stood a very young woman with long golden hair and a fantastic figure. Her beauty was most unusual. It Lykovs taiga a family of 'Old Believers' that lived in self-imposed isolation in the unknown to the outside world through most of the Soviet period. They were discovered by a party of geologists in 1978. Their story Pravda journalist Vasily Peskov in translation).
his book is told by Komsomolskaya Lost in the taiga (available in English Book i: Anastasia 20 would be hard to Imagine how any of the winners of the world's most prestigious beauty contests could rival her appearance, or, as later turned out, her intellectual prowess. Everything about this taiga girl was alluring, simply spellbinding.
"You are probably tired?" asked Anastasia. "Would you like to rest for a while?" We sat down right on the grass, and I was able to get a closer look at her face. There were no cosmetics covering her perfect features.
Her lovely well-toned skin bore beaten faces of people something that her As a kindly look, and her lips betrayed wore a short, light-weight smock, the same time giving the Impression indicated, she like a night-shirt, at body was not peratures.
no resemblance to the weatherlived in the Siberian backwoods.
knew who large greyish-blue eyes a gentle smile.
at all cold, in spite of the 12-15-degree tem- 4 decided to have a bite to eat.
reached Into out sandwiches, along with a travel bottle offered to share It filled my bag and took with good cognac.
I with Anastasia but she refused the cognac and for some reason even declined to eat with me.
While was snacking, Anastasia lay on the grass, her eyes blissfully closed, as though inviting the sun's rays to caress her.
The rays reflected off her upturned palms with a golden glow. Lying there half-exposed, she appeared absolutely gorgeous!
looked at her and thought to myself: bare to the limit either their legs, "Now why do women always or their breasts, or everything at once with their mini-skirts and decolletage? Is It not to appeal to the.men around them, as If to say: "Look how charming I am, how open And what are men obliged to do then? Fight against their fleshly passions and thereby denigrate women with their lack of attention? Or make advances toward them and thereby break a and accessible!" God-given law?" When I had finished eating, I asked: 4 12-15 degree temperatures — the Celsius (Centigrade) scale common throughout used throughout the book. 12-15 degrees Celsius equals 54-59 degrees Fahrenheit. To convert a Celsius temperature to Fahrenheit, multiply it by 1.8 and add 32.
Russia, Europe and Canada, is Encounter 21 "Anastasia, you're not afraid of walking through the taiga alone?" "There nothing have to fear here," replied Anastasia.
how would you defend yourself if you happened to encounter two or three burly men — geologists, or hunters, let's say?" "Interesting, but She didn't answer, only smiled.
"How thought: is it that this so extraordinarily alluring young beauty could not be afraid of anyone or anything?" What happened next day this still makes me feel uncomfortable, even to grabbed her by her shoulders and pulled her close to me.
She didn't offer any strong resistance, although siderable degree of strength in her resilient could feel a con- body The last thing remember before losing consciousness was her saying: "Do not do this... Calm down!" And even before that I remember being suddenly overcome by a powerful attack of fear. A fear of what, I couldn't — as sometimes happens in childhood when you find yourself grasp at home all alone and suddenly become afraid of something.
When I woke up, she was on her knees, bending over me. One hand lay upon my chest, while the other was waving to someone up above, or to either side. She was smiling, though not at me, but rather, it us.
seemed, someone who was at Anastasia seemed to be invisibly surrounding us or literally that there was nothing amiss going on.
looked above gesturing to her invisible friend Then she calmly and tenderly me in the eye: "Calm down, Vladimir, it is over now." "But what was it?" I asked.
"Harmony's disapproval of your attitude toward me, of the desire aroused in you. You will be able to understand "What's 'harmony' got to do with it?
It's it all later." you!
only that you yourself began to resist." "And I sat too did not accept up, and pulled "Come was offensive on, now! "She didn't accept me! It Oh you women!
bare your it.
You legs, stick to me." my bag over toward me.
just do everything you can to tempt shoes. That's very uncomfortable, and yet you do soon I'm not that your charm, but way...' us!
out your breasts, walk around in high-heeled wriggle with to her...' as What do you as...
"Oh, it!
You walk and don't wriggle for then?
need that!
Hypocrites!
Book i: Anastasia 22 I'm an entrepreneur and I've the same thing, only you seen a lot of your sorts. You act out differently. So Anastasia, take off your outer clothes?
why The weather's not want did you, that hot!
And then you lolled about on the grass here, with that alluring smile ofyours..." "I I am not that comfortable in clothing, Vladimir.
leave the like put woods and go out among people, but only everyone else. I just lay so it on when can look down to relax in the sun and not disturb you while you were eating." "So you didn't want to disturb me... Well, you did!" "Please forgive me, Vladimir. Of course, you are right about every woman wanting to attract a man's attention, but not just to her legs and breasts. What she wants is not to let pass by the one man who can see more than just those things." "But nobody's been passing by here!
must be seen, when it's your legs women, you're And what is s more' that that are front and centre?
Oh you so illogical!" "Yes, unfortunately, that is the way life sometimes turns out...
Maybe we should get along, Vladimir! Have you finished eating? Are you rested?" The thought crossed my mind: losophising wild woman? But "Fine, let's go." worth going on with I replied: this phi- Beast or Man?
We continued our journey to Anastasia's home, her outer clothes left behind in the tree hollow. Her galoshes too. She was short, light-weight frock.
She herself picked up wearing the my bag and offered to carry it. Barefoot, she walked ahead of me with an amazingly light and graceful We most step, waving the bag about her with talked the whole, time. Talking with her interesting.
Perhaps because she had her ease.
on any own subject was strange ideas about everything.
Sometimes Anastasia would whirl about while we were walking.
She turned her face to me, laughing, and kept on walking backwards for a while, quite absorbed in the conversation without so much as a How could she walk like that and not once stumble, or prick her bare feet against the knot of a dry branch? We glance down at her feet.
seem to be following any visible path; on the other hand, our way was not hindered by the tangled undergrowth so common in didn't the taiga.
As she walked she would occasionally touch or quickly brush by a on a bush. Or, bending over without looking, she would tear off some little blade of grass and... eat it.
leaf or a twig "Just like a little creature," I thought.
When berries were handy, Anastasia would offer me a few to eat as we walked. The muscles of her body didn't seem to have any unusual features. Her overall physique appeared quite average. Not too thin and not too plump.
from what could A resilient, well-fed and very beautiful body tell, it But, possessed a goodly degree of strength and extremely sharp reflexes.
Once when I stumbled and started to fall, my arms outstretched in front of me, Anastasia whirled around with lightning speed, quickly placing her free hand under me, and landed with my chest on her my body palm, her fingers spread wide. There she was supporting Book 24 Anastasia i: with the palm of one hand, helping During regain Its normal position.
time she went on talking, with not the slightest sign had straightened up with the help of her hand, we continued on our way, as though nothing whatever had happened.
For some reason my mind momentarily rested on the gas pistol I had of strain. After in my bag.
With all the Interesting conversation I hadn't realised how much ground we had actually been covering. All at once Anastasia stopped, put my bag down under a tree and joyfully exclaimed: "Here we are at home!" I looked around.
A neat little glade, dotted with flowers amidst a host of majestic cedars, but not a single structure to be seen.
Not even a hut. In a word, nothing! Not even a primitive lean-to! But Anastasia was beside herself with joy As though we had arrived at a most comfortable dwelling.
'And where Is your house? Where do you from the rain?" "This my house, Vladimir.
eat, sleep, take shelter have everything here." A dark sense of disquiet began to come over me.
"Where Is everything? Let's have a tea-kettle, so we can heat up some water on the fire. Let's have an axe." "I do not have a kettle or an not to light a axe, Vladimir.
And at least would be best fire." "What are you talking about? She doesn't even have a kettle?! The water in my bottle is all gone. You saw when I ate. I even threw the bottle away Now there's only a couple of swallows of cognac left.
get to the river or the village thirsty Where Seeing my a good day's walk, do you get water from?
and I'm so tired and What do you drink out of?" agitation, Anastasia herself showed me by the hand and led me admonishing me along the way: She quickly took the forest, Is To signs of concern.
through the glade into worry Vladimir! Please. Don't get upset. I shall take care of everything. You just rest. Get a good sleep. I shall take care of everything. You will not be cold. You are thirsty? I shall give you something to drink right away" Less than ten or fifteen metres from the glade, beyond a clump of bushes, we came across a small taiga lake. Anastasia quickly scooped "Not to Beast or Man?
up a small quantity of water in her cupped hands and raised 25 face.
"Here some water. Drink it, please." you crazy? How can you drink raw water out of some the woods? You saw how I was drinking borzbomi On "What, puddle in are 1 board ship even for washing we pass the filter, chlorinate "It is ter!
ozonise pure, living water!
Good wa- You can drink this water, half-destroyed water, like yours.
mother's milk! Look," Anastasia raised her cupped hands to her I through a special it." not a puddle, Vladimir. This just like it, river water lips and took a drink.
blurted out: 'Anastasia, are you some kind of beast?" "Why a beast? Because my bed cars? No appliances?" not like yours?
There no "Because you live like a beast, in the forest, you haven't any possessions, and you seem to enjoy that." "Ifes, I enjoy living here." "There, you see, you just "Do you all made my point." consider, Vladimir, that other creatures living on Earth what distinguishes his possession Man from of manufactured objects?" "Yes!
But even more precisely — his civilised existence." 'And do you consider your existence to be more course, you do. But I am not a beast, Vladimir.
"I am Man!" borzhomi of from the Caucasus mountains 2 a popular kind of mineral water Georgia, famous for The word Man civilised? Yes, its health-giving properties.
(with a capital M) is used throughout the book to refer to a human being of any gender. For details on the word's usage and the important distinction between Man and human please see the Translator's Preface.
Subsequently, after spending three days with Anastasia and observing how this strange Siberian taiga, style, young woman lives all began to understand a by herself in the remote something of her life- little and to be confronted by a number of questions regarding our own.
One of them still haunts me to this day: is our system of education and bringing up children comprehend the meaning of sufficient to existence, to arrange every individual's life-priorities in the correct order?
Does help or hinder our ability to make sense of Man's es- sence and purpose?
We have set up avast educational system.
It is system that we teach our children and each other school, university on the — in kindergarten, and post-graduate programmes.
that enables us to invent things, to fly into Space.
lives in accordance with some happiness Through for ourselves.
the atom, along with help we basis of this It is this We structure our strive to construct We strive to fathom the Universe and anomalous phenomena. We love to sorts of discuss and describe them at great length in sensational both the popular press and scholarly publications.
But there all stories in one phenomenon which, for some reason, we try with our might to avoid. Desperately try to avoid!
sion that system are afraid to talk about One gets the impres- We are afraid, I say, because commonly accepted systems of education and scientific deductions and make a mockery of the objects inherent in our lifestyle! And we try to pretend that such a phenomenon does not exist. But it does! And it will continue to exist, however much we try to turn away from it or avoid it.
could so easily knock the wind out of our Isn't it time to take a closer look the collective effort of all our at this and, just human minds to the following question? If you take maybe, through together, find an answer our great thinkers, without Who are they?
— people who have formulated religious teachings, all sorts of teachings which the vast majority of humanity are following — or that, before formulating at least endeavouring to follow — why is their teachings, they became recluses, went into solitude — in most exception cases, to the forest?
the forest!
Why did the on his Why desert, some super academy, mind you, but Old Testament's Moses go off into forest before returning forth a mountain-top and presenting to the world the wisdom set tablets of stone?
did Christ Jesus go off, away from his disciples, into the mountains and forest?
Why did a man named Siddhartha Gautama, who lived in India in the sixth century A. D. spend seven years alone in the forest? After which this recluse came out of the back to people, complete forest, with a set of teachings! Teachings which even to turies later, arouse a multitude of huge temples and call human minds.
these teachings Buddhism.
this day, many cen- And people build And the man him- known as Buddha. 2 And what about our own not-so-ancient forebears (now acknowl- self eventually came to be edged as historical figures) Radonezhsky? 4 Incidentally, — men such as Serafim Sarovsky 3 Why did they too go who become or Sergiy recluses in the even the word academy, translated from Greek, means grovesl Buddha or Siddhartha Gautama (623-544 B. C.) family, off to a member of the Imperial Shakya (according to tradition, at least) rejected the wealthy circumstances of his family upbringing and devoted his life to alleviating casionally referred to as Shakyamuni 'a recluse {lit.
departer) suffering.
He oc- from the Shakyas'.
Prokhor Sidorovich Moshnin, 1759-1833) — a monk of the who had a gift for healing and foretelling the future. He was particularly concerned about improving the situation of women and in the 1820s helped establish what would become the Holy Trinity Serafimo-Diveevo Women's Monastery Canonised in 1903, he is now one of the most revered saints of the Russian Orthodox Church.
Serafim Sarovsky (ne: Sarovsky Hermitage near Tambov, 4 Sergiy (ne: Varfolomei) Radonezhsky (i3i4?-i392) Rostov area, who devoted his life to the principle a monastic reformer from the of brotherly love and meeting the practical needs of the less fortunate; he also mediated disputes between warring princes. In the 1330s he founded a monastery deep in the Radonezh Forest north of Moscow (now the site of the town of Sergiev Posad, until recently called Zagorsk).
He was canonised in 1452.
and how were they able, after a short period of time there, to fathom the depths of wisdom that the kings of world made the long journey through uncharted wilderness to seek their advice?
Monasteries and majestic temples were raised at the locations of Thus, for example, the Trinity- Sergiev their respective solitudes.
Monastery In the town of Sergiev Posad near Moscow today attracts thousands of visitors each year. And It all started from a single forest recluse.
Why? Who or what enabled these people to obtain their wisdom?
Who gave them knowledge, who brought them closer to understand- How did they live, what did they do, what did ing the essence of life?
they think about during their forest solitude?
These questions confronted me some time after my conversations with Anastasia — after I had started reading everything that I could lay my hands on regarding recluses. But even today I haven't found answers. Why has nothing been written about their solitude experiences?
answers, think, must be sought through a collective ef- my three-day stay In the Siberian taiga forest and my impressions from my conversations with fort.
I shall try to describe the events of Anastasia, in the hopes that sence of this someone phenomenon and put will be able to fathom the es- together a clearer picture of our way of life.
For now, on the basis of thing crystal-clear to that me: people Including Anastasia, see what have seen and heard, only one who live In solitude in the forest, going on in our lives from a point of view completely different from ours. Some of Anastasia's ideas are the exact opposite of what the truth?
commonly accepted.
Who Is closer to Who can judge?
My task is simply to record what I have seen and heard, and thereby give others an opportunity to come up with answers.
Anastasia call the forest altogether alone. She has no house to her own, she hardly wears any clothes and does not store any pro- visions.
She the descendant of people for thousands of years who have been and represents what literally a living here whole differ- ent civilisation. She and those like her have survived to the present day through what can only term the wisest possible decisions. Very likely the only correct decisions.
in with us, trying to appear 29 When they are among us they blend different their places of habitual residence they from ordinary people, but in merge with Nature.
easy to find their habitual dwelling-places. Indeed, Man's presence in such places betrayed only by the fact that they are more beautiful and better taken care of, like Anastasla's forest glade, for example.
Anastasia was born here and an integral part of the natural sur- roundings. In contrast to our celebrated recluses, she did not go off into the forest simply for a time, as they did.
taiga and visits our world only for brief periods.
She was born in the And on the face of it there seems to be quite a simple explanation for the strong fear that overwhelmed me and made to possess Anastasia me lose consciousness when I attempted — just as we tame a cat, a dog, an elephant, a ti- an eagle, and so on, here everything around has been Earned'. 5 And ger, this everything her.
incapable of permitting anything bad to happen to Anastasia told under a year 'And you old, me that when she was born and while she was still her mother could leave her alone on the grass.
didn't die from hunger?" taiga recluse first looked at asked.
me in surprise, but then ex- plained: One "There should be no problems of finding food for Man.
should eat just as one breathes, not paying attention to the food, not distracting one's thought has left his own destiny" that task She snapped her from more important to others, so that fingers, things.
The Creator Man can live as Man, and right away a little squirrel fulfilling popped up beside her, hopping onto her hand. Anastasia lifted the creature's muzzle up to her mouth, and the squirrel passed from Its mouth Into hers a cedar nut seed, to its shell already removed. This did not anything out of the ordinary remembered how, back academic complex near Novosibirsk, a lot seem at the of squirrels were quite — in this case meaning 'brought into an interrelationship with Man academic complex — just outside Novosibirsk there is a whole town known as Akademgorodok Academic town') — home of the Siberian branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences as well as Novosibirsk State University — where the professors 5 tamed' .
(lit.
and researchers live as well as work.
used to people and would beg for food from passers-by, and even get angry if they weren't given anything. Here was simply observing But this here was the taiga, and I said: the process in reverse.
"In the normal world, our world, everything's arranged differently snapping your fingers If you, Anastasia, tried osk, 7 or even beat on at a privately-run ki- drum, nobody would give you anything, and here you say the Creator has decided everything." "Who is to blame if Man has decided to change the Creator's creative design?
you to This Whether it is for the better or for the worse, that divine." the kind of dialogue had with Anastasia on the question of human sustenance. Her position thought on things like food, simple sinful to and she does not think about for us in our civilised world, as happens, waste But are obliged to give thought.
We know from books, reports in the press and TV programmes, of a multitude of examples of infants who have found themselves out in the wilds and ended up being fed by wolves. Here in the erations of people have taiga gen- made their permanent residence, and their kingdom is different from ours. I asked relationship to the animal Anastasia: "Why aren't you cold, when here I am in a warm jacket?" "Because," she replied, "the bodies of people who wrap themselves in clothing to hide from the cold and heat, gradually lose to adapt to changes in their environment. In of the human body has not been lost, and my case I their ability this capacity have no need of any special clothing." — small enclosed stands selling food and many other items under opposed to State) control, which began proliferating during the latter days of perestroika and are still popular today 1 privately-run kiosk private (as ^ i 5 ' A forest bedroom I wasn't at Anastasia put equipped to spend a night in the wilds of the bed in sorne kind of cave hollowed out of the my wearying trek, ground. Exhausted after forest.
quickly fell fast asleep.
When I woke up, I felt a sense of bliss and comfort, as though I were lying in a magnificently comfortable bed.
cave, or dugout, was spacious, appointed with small feath- ery cedar twigs and dried grass which the surrounding space my limbs, one hand with a fragrant aroma. As Book i: Anastasja 34 In her early childhood, in addition to her mother's milk Anastasia was able to draw upon the milk of many different animals. They freely allowed her access to their nipples. She makes absolutely no ritual of mealtime, never sits down just to eat, but picks berries and sprouts of plants as she walks and continues on with her By the end of my three-day late to her as I had done at our stay with her first activities.
could no longer re- encounter. After all I had seen and heard Anastasia had been transformed for me into some kind of being — but not a beast, since she has such a high degree of intelli- gence, and then there's her memory!
Her memory is such that she, of course, forgets nothing of what she has seen or heard at any moment in time.
At times it seemed that her abilities are well comprehension of the average person. But her is very attitude toward this something that greatly distresses and upsets In contrast to certain people we beyond the her.
know with unusual abilities all people who wrap themselves in an aura of mystery and exclusivity she constantly tried to explain and reveal the abilities, to or in her mechanism underlying her prove that there was nothing supernatural to Man in them — that she was Man, a woman, and she repeatedly asked me mind after that, and extraordinary phenomenon.
to bear that in mind. I did attempt to try to find an explanation for this keep in In our civilisation one's brain works to develop a life for one's self, obtain food to eat and satisfy one's sexual instincts. In Anastasia's world no time spent on these things whatsoever. Even people who 2 find themselves in a situation like the Lykovs' are obliged to constantly give thought to don't get help There are how to feed and shelter themselves. They from Nature to the same extent as does Anastasia.
from civilisation that are not sorts of tribes living far blessed with this kind of contact. According to Anastasia, it is be- cause their thoughts are not pure enough. Nature and the animal world feel this.
See footnote 3 Chapter 2: "Encounter".
Anastasia's ray think the most unusual, mystical phenomenon witnessed during my time in the forest was Anastasia's ability to see not only individuals at great distance but also what was going on In their lives. Possibly other recluses have had a similar ability She did with the help of an invisible ray She maintained was something everybody are unable to has, but people don't know about and make use of It.
"Man has still not invented anything that Is not already in Nature.
The technology behind television Is but a poor imitation of the possibilities The of this ray" ray being invisible, didn't believe In peated attempts to demonstrate and explain it, in spite of her re- how it worked, to find some proof or plausible explanation. And then one day...
"Tell me, Vladimir, what do you think daydreams are? And do many people dream of the future?" "Daydreaming?
think a lot of people are able to do that.
It's when you imagine yourself In a future of your own desire." "Fine. So, his you do not deny that own future, "That Man has the capacity to visualise to visualise various specific situations?" don't deny" 'And what about intuition?" probably the feeling one has when, instead of anwhat or why something might happen, some sort of feelings "Intuition... It's alysing suggest the right thing to do." "So, In Man there ordinary analytical reasoning that helps exists something besides him determine his own and others' behaviour?" "Well, let's say that's true." "Wonderful! Good!" exclaimed Anastasia. "Now, the night-dream.
The night-dream — what is that? The dreams almost all people have when they are asleep." Book i: Anastasia 36 "The night dream know what don't I really that's...
that Is.
When you're asleep, a dream is simply a dream." 'AH right, it exists?
state, Let us all right.
dream. But you do not deny call It just a You and other people someone are aware that In a dream when his body Is almost beyond the control of a part of his con- sciousness, can see people "Well that, "But still think, Is sorts of things going on." something nobody will deny." dream people can communicate, hold conversations, empathise?" "Yes, they can." "And what do you think, can a person control his dream? Call up the dream Images and events he would like to see? Just like on ordinary television, for example." "I don't think that would work out for anyone.
how, comes The dream, some- by itself." "You are wrong.
Man can con Leo?
everythi Man is designed to lg.
control everything.
"The ray sesses am telling you about consists of information one pos- concepts, intuitions, emotional feelings and, as a result, of dream-like visions consciously controlled by Man's will" "How can a dream be controlled In a dream?" Wide awake! As if pre-programmed, and with a dream and it is chaYou only expei Luce this otic. Man has lost most of his ability to control, to control natural phenom sna an himself So he has decided that a night-dream is "Not in a dream.
absolute accuracy i 1 simply an Incidental by-product of everybody on the something a ahead." "Lie down c n energy way?
Well, it Is fact, almost try helping you see tired brain.
sho 'Id th ; grass and elaj le go.
t < that your body draws important that you are comfortable. Nothing in the Now think about the person you example. Recollect her habits, you think Ms maybe distance right here and now?" "Go less Earth..,.
she aiigl know best your wife, for she walks, her clothing, where be right nov and turn whole thing over to your imagination." Iren embered it our co my wife knowing that at th m try home imagined the jfc se*
n noment she might be; onie o f the furnishings " Anastasia's ray and things.
remembered a great deal, and in some detail, but I see anything.
told Anastasia about "You are not able to go to let go sleep. I shall help you.
all this, and she 37 didn't replied: the way, as though you were going to Close your eyes. Stretch out your arms In different directions.
Closing my eyes, I felt her fingers touch mine.
began to immerse myself in a dream, or a wakeful doze...
... There was my wife standing in the kitchen of our country home.
Over her usual dressing gown she was wearing a knitted cardigan.
That meant it was cool in the house. Again some kind of trouble with the heating system.
My wife was making coffee on the gas stove. And something else, My wife's face was gloomy and unhappy Her In the small crock-pot.
movements were sluggish. All at once she turned her head, tripped over to the window, looked out at the rain and smiled.
the stove was spilling over. She picked up the pot with its coffee on overflow- ing liquid but didn't frown or get upset as she usually did. She took off the cardigan...
woke up.
"Well? Did you I "I did indeed.
see anything?" asked Anastasia.
But maybe "How could It be was ordinary?
just an ordinary dream?" Did you not plan on seeing your wife in particular?" "Yes, I did.
And I saw her. But where Is the proof that she was acmoment I saw her in the dream?" tually there in the kitchen at the "Remember this day and hour, Vladimir, if you want to have proof.
ask her. Was there not something else out of When you get home, the ordinary that you noticed?" "Can't think of anything." "You mean to say you did not notice a smile on your wife's face when she went over to the window? She was smiling, and she did not get upset when the coffee spilled." "That did notice. She probably saw something interesting out window which made her feel good." 'All she saw out the window was rain. Rain which she never likes." the "So, "I why was she smiling?" too was watching your wife through my ray and warmed her up." 38 "So, your ray warmed her up — what about mine?
Too cold?" "You were only looking out of curiosity you did not put any feeling into it." "So, your ray can warm people "Yes, can do 'And what else at a distance?" that." can do?" "Obtain certain kinds of information, or transmit. It can cheer up a person's mood and partially take away someone's illness. There are a lot of other things can do, depending on the energy available and the degree of feeling, will and desire." "And can you see the future?" "Of course." "The past too?" "The future and the past It is they are pretty much the same thing.
The essence always only the external details that are different.
remains unchanged." "How can that be? What can remain unchanged?" wore different different instruments at their disposal.
But that "Well, for example, a thousand years ago people clothes.
They had not the essence. Back a thousand years ago, had the same feelings. Feelings are "Fear, joy, love. Just think, Yaroslav the and the Egyptian pharaohs were just like today, people not subject to time.
Wise, Ivan the Terrible capable of loving a 2 woman with same feelings as you or any other man today" "Interesting. Only Fm not sure what it means. You say every per- exactly the son can have a ray like this?" Even today people still have feelings the capacity to dream of the future, to conjecture, to "Of course everyone can.
intuitions, Yaroslav the Wise (Russian: Taroslav Mudry; 978?-io54 Grand Prince of Kiev who managed to impose a degree of unity on the warring princes of what was then Kievan Russia, consolidate its southern and western borders and establish dynastic liaisons with a number of European nations.
Ivan the Terrible (Russian: Ivan IV, Ivan Grozny, 1530-1584) Prince to proclaim pression of political rivals cal — the first Russian Grand His reign was marked by bloody reand wealthy aristocrats, stronger ties with England, politi- himself Tsar ofall the Russias.
social reforms at home and an expansion of the Russian Empire eastward.
.
visualise specific situations, to it is all have dreams while they sleep 39 only chaotic and uncontrollable." "Maybe some kind of training's necessary Some exercises could be developed?" "Some exercises might help.
But you know, Vladimir, there absolute condition before the ray can be controlled by the 'And what condition "It is absolutely one will..." that?" necessary to keep one's thoughts pure, as the strength of the ray depends on the strength of radiant feelings." "Now there you go Just when everything was starting to get clear.
What have pure thoughts got to do with it? 'Radiant feelings?" !
"They are what power the ray." "That's enough, Anastasia! I'm already losing interest.
be adding something Next you'll else." have already told you what is essential." "You can say what you like, but you've got too many darn conditions! Let's talk about something else. Something a little simpler..." "I All day long Anastasia engages in meditation, visualising situations from our past, present and future sorts of life.
Anastasia possesses a phenomenal memory. She can remember a multitude of people she has seen in her imagination or through her ray, and what they have been going through mentally. She's a con- summate actress she can imitate the way they walk and talk, even think the way they do. She concentrates her thought on the and life experience of millions of people in the past and present. She uses the knowledge she gains from this to visualise the future and to help by means of her invisible ray, and the ones she helps through suggestion or decision, or the ones others. This she does at a great distance she heals, haven't the slightest idea that she It was helping them.
only later that I found out that similar rays invisible to the eye, only of different degrees of strength, emanate from every individual.
4-0 The academician Anatoly Akimov photographed them with 3 devices and published his results in 1996 in the zine Chudesa May issue of the maga- (Wonders and Adventures) i prikliuchenia Unfortunately, we are unable to use these rays as she does. In scientific phenomenon such as this ray is known as a torsion field.
Anastasia's world-view special literature a unusual and interesting.
"What is God, Anastasia? Does He exist?
If so, why hasn't anyone seen Him?" "God the interplanetary Mind, or Intelligence.
found in a single mass. Half of Him the Universe. This He is not to be in the non-material realm of sum total of all energies.
The other half of Him is dispersed across the Earth, in every individual, in every Man.
The dark forces strive to block these particles." "What do you think awaits our civilisation?" "In the long term, a realisation of the futility of the technocratic path of development and a movement back to our primal origins." "You mean to say that all our scholars are immature beings who are leading us into a dead end?" "I mean to say that they are accelerating the process, they are bring- ing you closer to the realisation that you are 'And so? All the cars on the wrong path." and houses we build are pointless?" "Yes." "You're not bored living here alone, Anastasia? Alone, without television or telephone?" "These primitive things you mention, Man has possessed them right from the very beginning, only in a more perfect form. I have them." ^Anatoly Evgenevich Akimov — Director of the International Institute of Theoretical and Applied Physics of the Russian Academy of Natural Sciences.
"Both television and telephone?" "Well, mation what television?
A device through which certain scenes and story-plots are acted out.
tion, outline the plot situations - of any story, human Imagination and my own imagina- and act out the most improbable even take part in them myself, ence on the outcome. ... Oh dear, myself too clear, infor- can, through served up to an almost atrophied suppose just like I having an influ- have not been making eh?" 'And the telephone?" "Every Man can talk with any other Individual without the a telephone. All that needed and a developed imagination." aid of the will and desire of both parties \!#-' Concert in the taiga proposed that she herself come to Moscow and appear on TV.
"Just think, Anastasia, with your beauty you could easily be a world-class fashion or photomagazine model!
And matters at this point I realised that she 9' was no stranger to earthly — like all women, she delighted in being a beauty Anastasia burst out laughing.
'A world-class beauty eh?" She echoed a child, began my question and then, like to frolic about, prancing through the glade like a mod- on a catwalk.
I was amused at her imitation of a fashion model, placing one foot in front of the other in turn as she walked, showing off imaginary outfits. Finding myself getting into the act, I applauded and anel nounced: "And now, ladies and gentlemen, your attention, please! Performing before you will be that magnificent gymnast, second-to-none, that incomparable beauty: Anastasia!" This announcement tickled her fancy even more.
She ran out into the middle of the glade and executed an incredible flying somersault — first forward, then backward, then to the side, both left right, then an amazingly high leap into the air.
Grasping a tree- branch with one hand, she swung herself around it twice before fling- ing her body over to another tree. After yet another somersault, she began to bow coquettishly to my applause. Then she ran off out of the glade and hid behind some thick bushes. Anastasia peeped smilingly out from behind them, as though they were a theatre-curtain, impatiently awaiting I remembered my next announcement.
a videotape being performed by popular the evening in had of some of my favourite songs would watch it occasionally in artists. I my cabin aboard ship.
had this tape in mind (but not Concert in the taiga 43 with the thought that Anastasia would actually be able to reproduce anything from it) as I announced: "Ladies and gentlemen, now present to you the our current stage, in a performance of their top hits.
star singers of Your attention, please!" Oh, how wrong I had been in my estimate of her abilities. What happened next I could not possibly have predicted. No sooner had Anastasia made her entrance from behind her improvised curtain, than she launched into the authentic voice of Alia Pugachova. No, it wasn't just a parody or an imitation, but Alia herself, effortlessly conveying not only her voice, but her intonations and emotions as well.
But an even more amazing feature was to come. Anastasia accentuated particular words, adding something of her own, infus1 own supplemental attenuations, so that Alia own performance, which before, it seemed, nobody else even begin to surpass, now called forth a whole new range of ing the song with her Pugachova's could additional feelings, illuminating the images even more clearly.
In a magnificently executed overall performance of the song: Once lived an artist alone, Canvases all through his home.
He loved an actress, he thought, Flowers were her love, fresh-grown.
He went and sold his big home, Sold every canvas he owned, And with the money he bought Whole fields offlowers, fresh-grown.
Anastasia put particular emphasis on the word "canvas".
this word in fright and surprise. A canvas is most prized possession — without it he can no longer She screamed out an artist's one of the most popular Alia Borisovna Pugachova (also spelt: Pugacheva, 1949-) Russian stage and screen singers of the twentieth century, the recipient of a number of national and international awards. Pugachova, known as a 'national Russian leg- Canada and America. Her Alia entertainment company grew out ofAlia Pugachova's Theatre ofSong which she has headed end', has toured extensively abroad, including as Artistic Director since 1988.
Book 44 create i: and here he giving up the most precious thing he owns words Then she for the sake of his loved one. Later, as she sang the went off on the train, Anastasia tenderly portrayed the artist in love, looking longingly after the departing train which was carrying off his loved one forever. She portrayed his pain, his despair, his perplexed state of mind.
was too shaken by everything had seen and heard to applaud the end of the song. Anastasia bowed, anticipating the applause and, hearing none, launched into a She performed new song with even more enthusiasm.
of my favourite songs, in the same order they had been recorded on the videotape.
heard so many times before, And every single song, which I had was now even clearer and more mean- ingful in her rendition.
Upon completing the last song on the tape, plause, Anastasia retreated 'backstage I remained seated in silence, 9.
hearing no ap- Too dumbfounded to speak, feeling an extraordinary impression from what I had just witnessed. Then I jumped up, began applauding and cried: "Terrific, Anastasia!
Encore! Bravo! All performers on stage!" bow Anastasia gingerly stepped forth and gave a kept on shouting: "Encore! Bravo!" clapping my hands and stamping my feet.
She too livened up. She clapped her hands and a Encore does that mean Again?" And "Yes, again!
again!
again!...
cried: You did it so marvellously Even better than our Anastasia! Better than the singers themselves!
top stars!" I fell silent and began attentively studying Anastasia.
thought how multifaceted her soul must be if she could infuse her singing performance with so many new, splendid, clear features. She too stood motionless, silently and enquiringly looking at me.
' Anastasia, do you have any song of your something of your own, something "I could, like to hear but my song it?" sing haven't heard before?" does not have any words.
"Please sing your song." "Fine." own? Couldn't you Would you she started In singing her most unusual song. Anastasia screamed like a newborn baby. Then her voice first started sounding qui- tender and caressing. She stood beneath a tree, her hands clasped et, to her breast, her head bowed. It was like a lullaby, gently caressing a one with her voice. Her voice spoke to him of something very little tender.
grow Her soft voice, amazingly pure, caused everything around 9 the birds singing, the chirping of the crickets in the grass. At that point Anastasia seemed to take absolute delight in the little one waking from sleep. The sound of rejoicing could be heard in her voice. The incredibly high-pitched sounds soared above the Earth before taking flight into the heights of infinity Anastasia's voice first too pleaded, then went Into battle, and once again caressed one and bestowed joy upon felt this her song, around.
all-pervading sense of joy I joyfully And when she finished exclaimed: "And now, my dear ladies and gentlemen, a unique and never- to-berepeated number by the top animal trainer In the world! The most agile, brave, charming trainer, capable of taming any beast of prey on Earth! Behold and tremble!" Anastasia positively squealed with delight, leapt into the air, clapped her hands in rhythm, shouted something, started In whistling.
Something could never have imagined began taking place in the glade.
First the she-wolf made her entrance.
and stopped at the She leapt out of the bushes edge of the glade, giving a puzzled look around.
In the trees farthest from the glade squirrels sprang from branch to branch.
Two eagles circled low overhead, while creatures of some kind rustled in the bushes. With the sharp crackle of dry twigs he broke and crushed the bushes, a huge bear lumbered out Into the glade and stopped, as though embedded in the ground, just short as of Anastasia.
The wolf began growling him disapprovingly since the bear had approached so close to Anastasia without an Invitation.
Anastasia ran up to the bear, playfully stroking his muzzle, then grabbed him by his front paws and stood him upright. Judging by the fact that she didn't seem to be exerting much physical effort in this, the bear himself must have been carrying out her according to commands how much he understood and how he interpreted them.
Booki: Anastasia 4.6 He stood stock still, trying to understand what was desired of him.
Anastasia took a running leap and, grabbing hold of the thick scruff of the bear's neck, did a handstand on his shoulders, jumping off again with a somersault on her way down. Then she took the bear by one paw and started to bend over, pulling the bear after her — creat- was tossing him over her shoulder. This trick would have been impossible if the bear had not been able to do it himself. Anastasia simply guided him. It looked at first as though the bear was going to fall on Anastasia, but at the last moment he
Anastasia was still asleep. And over the endless Siberian taiga the first glow of light was breaking across the pre-dawn sky. This time I was the first to waken, but stayed quietly lying beside her on my sleeping bag, admiring her serene and beautiful face and the flowing contours of her figure, as the soft, heavenly light of the advancing morning made them ever more distinct. It was good that this time she had arranged for us to spend the night under the open sky. She had no doubt been able to sense the warmth and gentle stillness of the approaching night, and so had made our bed not in her cozy dug-out cave but outdoors, at its entrance. She had spread out my sleeping bag, which I had brought during a previous visit to the taiga, while she fixed up beside me a beautiful place to sleep for herself, comprised of flowers and dried grasses. 
She looked picture-perfect lying there on that taiga bed, wearing a thin flaxen knee-length dress, which I had brought her as a gift from my readers. Perhaps she put it on only when I was around; she was quite capable of sleeping in the nude. The colder it was in the forest, the more dried grasses were applied; after all, a haystack can keep out the cold in the winter too. Even a simple soul without Anastasia's level of hard iness could sleep comfortably in hay without extra clothing. I tried it myself But this time I was lying there on my sleeping bag, looking at Anastasia resting beside me, and I kept imagining how this whole scene might look in a wide-screen feature film. 
A sylvan glade in the depths of the endless Siberian taiga. The pre-dawn stillness is only rarely broken by a scarcely audible rustling of branches in the crowns of the majestic cedars. And here is this beautiful woman so serenely asleep on her bed of grasses and flowers. Her breathing is perfectly even and betrely audible. The only thing noticeable is the slight swaying to and fro of a blade of grass clinging to her upper lip as she inhales and exhales the health-giving air of the Siberian taiga. 
Never before had I managed to see Anastasia asleep here - she was always the first to awake. But this time... 
I took great delight in watching her. Carefully raising my upper body and resting on my elbow, I studied her face, immersed myself in thought and began talking to myself 
You are still altogether beautiful, Anastasia. It will soon be ten years that we have known each other. Of course I've got older during this time, while you've hardly changed at all No wrinkles on your face. Only your golden hair is now showing one strand of silver grey. Apparently something extraordinary's happened to you. Judging by the massive campaign that's been unleashed against you and your ideas, judging by what is being said in the press and bureaucrats' offices, something is going on in the dark forces' camp. They keep trying to get on my nerves, and I know how they'd love to get their hands on you. But their arms are evidently not long enough... 
And still, you've got that grey strand of hair showing. But it can't spoil your extraordinary beauty. You know, tinting individual strands a variety of colours is an 'in' thing right now. Among our young people today highlighting strands is a hip fashion statement. And you don't even need to go to a hairdresser's - it's just happened all on its own. And the scar where that bullet grazed you, I it's practically gone. 
'See Book 3, Chapter T 'Assault!". 
The pre-dawn sky continued to brighten, and the scar was barely noticeable, even up close. Soon it would disappear completely. 
Look at you sleeping so peacefully here in the fresh air, in your own taiga world, iobile out there, in our world, extremely significant events are takingplace. Researchers are talking about an 'information revolution'. Perhaps it is thanks to you, or perhaps they are simply following the dictates of their own hearts, but people in our technocratic world are beginning to create their own family domains, enriching the land They have adopted your image wholeheartedly, Anastasia - the marvellous image of the future for their family, the country and possibly the whole order of the Universe. They have understood all you have said and are building this marvellous future for themselves. 
And I am trying to comprehend, too. I'm trying my best. I still don't completely understand what you mean to me. You taught me to write books, you bore me a son, you made me famous, you brought back my daughter's respect for me - you've done a lot! But that's not the main point. It's in something else, the main point. Perhaps its lying hidden somewhere within. 
You know, Anastasia, I have never spoken of my feelings for you, neither to you nor even to myself In fact, I've never told any woman in my whole life that I love ber: 
I've never said tbat, not because I'm completely witbout feelings, but because these words have always seemed strange to me, even nonsensical After all, if a person loves another, this love should be reflected in one's actions toward one's beloved. If words need to be spoken, that means there are no genuine, tangible actions. It's the actions, after all - not words - that are most important. 
Anastasia stirred ever so slightly; took a deep breath, but did not waken. And I continued to talk with her, still speaking wi thin myself 
Not once have I ever spoken to you about love, Anastasia. But if you asked me to fetch you a star from the sky, I would climb up to the top of the tallest tree, and pushing off from the uppermost branch, I'd 
take a leap in the direction of that star. If I happened to fall, I would catch myself on its branches, and climb up once more to the top, and again leap toward the star. 
You've never asked me to fetch you a star from the sky. You only asked me to write books, and I am writing them. But my writing doesn't always come out too welt. Sometimes I falt. But I'm not done with them yet, after all. I still haven't written my final book. I'll try to write it so you'll like it. 
Anastasia's eyelashes fluttered, a gentle glow flushed across her cheeks, and she opened her eyes. I caught the tender gaze of her greyish-blue eyes... Oh, Lord, what a warmth those eyes always give off, especially when they're so close to me. Anastasia watched me without a word, but her eyes sparkled as though full of moisture. 
"Good morning, Anastasia!" I said. "You probably haven't had a good long sleep like that before - you've always woken up before me." 
'~d a good morning to you, and a marvellous day, Vladimir," Anastasia responded quietly, almost in a whisper. "I should like to have just a wee bit more sleep." 
"So you haven't had enough sleep yet?" 
"I have, and a very good sleep at that. But my dream... I was having such a pleasant pre-dawn dream." 
"What kind of dream? What was it about?" 
"I dreamt you were talking with me. About a tall tree and a star, about falling down and climbing up again. The words were about the tree and the star, but it struck me as though they were really about love." 
"Things can often seem pretty fuzzy in dreams. What connection could a tree possibly have with love?" 
"Everything can have a connection, and great meaning too. 
It is the feelings that matter here, not the words. This day's dawn has brought me an extraordinary feeling. I shall go out to greet and embrace -" 
"Who?" 
"This marvellous day; which has offered me such an extraordinary gift." 
Anastasia slowly rose to her feet, stepped a few paces away from the cave entrance and then... She did something she always did in the mornings - her unique exercise routine. There she was, flinging her arms out to the sides and a little bit upward. She gave a momentary glance up at the sky and then all at once spun round. Then she ran off and did an incredible somersault before spinning round again. 
Lying on my sleeping bag by the cave entrance, I admired Anastasia's darts and lunges and thought: Wow! A mature woman already, and look how quickly, beautifully and energetically she moves, just like a young gymnast! Fascinating, how she felt what I had in mind as I was talking to myself while she was sleeping! Maybe I really should own up to her? 
And I cried out: 
''Anastasia, it wasn't simply a dream you were having." 
She stopped her exercise routine at once and stood there in the middle of the glade. Then she deftly turned a couple of cartwheels in my direction and landed right beside me. She quickly sat down on the ground and joyfully enquired: 
"Not simply a dream? And just how is it not 'simple'? Out with it! Tell me all the details!" 
"Well, you see, I was thinking about that same tree. I was talking to myself about a star." 
"And where, tell me, where did you get these words from? 
What produced them - these words?" 
"Maybe feelings?" 
Our conversation was interrupted by a cry from Anastasia's grandfather. 
''Anastasia! Anastasia, listen to me right away! Do you read me?" 
Anastasia jumped up, and I got up quickly; too. 
CHAPTER Two 
Dominion over radiation 
"Has Volodya been up to something unusual again?" Anastasia enquired of her grandfather, who had rushed over to us. And Grandfather, with a passing glance at me and a brief "Hello, Vladimir!", explained: 
"He is down by the lakeshore. He dived down and brought up a stone from the bottom. Now he is standing there, clutching it in his hand. It is safe to assume that the stone is burning his hand, but he will not let it go. And I do not know what advice to give him." 
Then Grandfather turned to me and barked: 
"Your son's down there. You're his father. What are you standing here for?" 
Not fully aware of what was going on, I ran down to the lake. Grandfather ran alongside me and explained: 
"This stone is radioactive. It isn't big, but contains a good deal of energy - an energy similar to radiation." 
"How did it happen to turn up at the bottom of the lake?" "It's been lying there a long time. My father, even, knew about that stone. But nobody's been able to dive down to it." 
"How did Volodya manage it? How did he know about 
it?" 
"I trained him to do deep-water dives." "What for?" 
"He kept pestering me to show him, asking me again and again. You two don't seem to have the time to look after your own child's upbringing - you've been shoving the whole burden onto the shoulders of your elders." 
''And who told him about the stone?" 
"Now who would have told him, eh, apart from me? I told him." 
"What for?" 
"He wanted to know what stopped the lake from freezing over in winter." 
As we approached the lake, I saw my son standing on the shore. IEs hair and shirt were all wet, but the water had already dripped off them, which told me he had been standing like that for some time. 
Volodya stood with his arm stretched out in front of him, his fingers clenched into a fist, which he kept his eyes fixed on like a hawk. It was clear his hand was clutching that same sinister stone from the bottom of the lake. I took two steps in his direction. He quickly turned his head toward me and said: 
"Don't come any closer, Papa." And when I stopped, he added: 
"Good health to your thoughts, Papa! But keep back just a little further. Maybe it would be better if you and Grandfather lay down on the ground. I shall be able to better concentrate that way." 
Grandfather at once lay down on the ground, and without really knowing why; I followed suit. For some time we didn't say a word, just watching Volodya standing on the shore. Then a rather simple thought struck me, and I said: 
"Volodya, couldn't you just toss it a little ways away?" "Where away?" my son asked, not turning his head. "Into the grass." 
"I must not throw it into the grass. It could cause a lot of destruction. I feel I must not throw it away yet." 
"So, does that mean you're going to keep standing there all day, or two days? What next? You're going to stand there a whole week? Or a month, even?" 
"I am thinking about what to do, Papa. Let us keep quiet and give thought a chance to find the solution without being distracted." 
Grandfather and I lay silently on the grass and looked at Volodya. And all at once I became aware of Anastasia approaching slowly - too slowly, under the circumstances - from the other end of the shore. When she got about five metres from Volodya's position, she sat down at the water's edge, as if nothing unusual were going on. She let her feet dangle in the water and stayed there that way for some time. Eventually she turned to our son and very calmly enquired: 
"Is it burning your hand, son?" "Yes, Mama," Volodya replied. 
"What were you thinking about when you fetched the stone? And what are you thinking about right now?"
"The stone is giving off energy, similar to radiation. 
Grandfather was telling me about it. But Man' also gives off energy. I know that. And human energy is always stronger than any other - it cannot be dominated by any other. I brought up the stone and I am holding it. I am trying with all my might to repress its energy - to send it back inside the stone. I want to demonstrate that Man has dominion over any radiation." 
"And are you succeeding in demonstrating the superiority of the energy coming from yourself?" 
"Yes, Mama, I am succeeding. Only it is becoming increas- 
ingly hotter. It is burning my fingers and palm just a little." 
"Why do you not throw it away?" "I feel that I must not do that." "Why?" 
'Man - Throughout the Ringing Cedars Series, the word Man with a capital M is used to refer to a human being of either gender. For details on the word's usage and the important distinction between klan and human being, please see the Translator's Preface to Book I. 
Dominion over radiation 

"I feel it." "Why?" 
"It... It will explode, Mama. It will explode just as soon as I open my hand. There will be a big explosion." 
"You are correct, it will explode. The stone is giving off the energy accumulated inside it. You used your own energy to repress its flow and direct it back inside. You used your thought to shape the nucleus within the stone, and your energy is now building up inside it, along with its own. It cannot go on accumulating indefinitely. It is already raging within the nucleus you formed with your own thoughts - it is getting hotter and the stone is burning your hand." 
"I realise that, and that is why I am not letting go of my hold." Outwardly Anastasia was the picture of calm. Her movements were slow and smooth, her speech was measured and with pauses. I could still feel, however, the extremely intense concentration of her thought - it must have been working faster than ever. She rose to her feet, gave what appeared to be a lethargic stretch, and said quietly: 
"That means you realise, Volodya, that if you open your 
hand suddenly, there could be an explosion?" 
"Yes, Mama." 
"That means you have to release it gradually." "How?" 
'Just a tiny bit at first. First, ease up on your thumb and index finger to expose just a fraction of the stone. Picture in your mind right off how the energy you directed into the stone is emanating straight upward like a ray. And its own energy will begin to follow suit. Be careful: the ray must be directed only straight up." 
Concentrating all his attention on his tightly clenched fist, Volodya gradually eased the pressure on his thumb and index finger. It was a sunny morning, but even in broad daylight one could see the ray emanating from the stone. A bird flying way 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
up high fell into the ray and was immediately transformed into a puff of smoke. It looked as though a small cloud exploded in vapour when the ray passed through it. A few minutes later and the ray was scarcely noticeable. 
"Oh, I have been sitting here with you too long!" said Anastasia. "1 think 1 may go and make us some breakfast while you amuse yourselves here." 
She took her time leaving. After going only a few steps, she staggered a bit, and then headed down to the water and washed her face. No doubt her outward calm had concealed an incredible inner tension. She had hid it so as not to frighten her son and interfere with his actions. 
"How did you know exactly what 1 should do?" Volodya called out after the receding figure of Anastasia. 
"How, indeed?" Grandfather echoed, mockingly. He had already got up from the ground and was feeling in much better spirits. "What do you mean, how? At school your Mama was a top-notch pupil in physics!" And he burst out in a loud guffaw. 
Anastasia turned toward us and broke into laughter herself, explaining: 
"1 had not known about that before, son. But whatever happens, you always need to look for and find a solution. And not to let your thought be fettered by fear." 
When the ray could no longer be seen at all, Volodya opened his hand completely. A small oblong stone was lying quietly on his palm. He stared at it for some time, muttering under his breath as he addressed the stone: "What is inside you is no match for Man!" 
Then he once again closed his hand into a fist and dived straight into the water without taking off his shirt. It was a good three minutes before he resurfaced and headed back toward the shore. 
"I was the one who taught him how to hold his breath that long," Grandfather commented. 
II 
After Volodya came out of the water, he jumped up and down to dry himself off, then headed over our way. I couldn't wait, but burst out: 
"D'you have any idea what radiation is, son? I guess you don't. If you did, you wouldn't have gone and fetched that wretched stone. Can't you find yourself some other business to poke your nose into?" 
"I know all about radiation, Papa. Grandfather told me about the disasters that have happened at your nuclear power plants, about your atomic weapons and the dangers now posed by the storage of nuclear waste." 
"So, what's all the interest in this stone lying at the bottom of the lake? What about it?" 
"Yes, indeed, what about it?" Grandfather joined the conversation. "You preach at him, Vladimir. I'm going to go have a little rest. It seems that lately your son's been making quite a few demands on me." 
Grandfather started heading off, leaving me alone with my son. 
And here he was, standing in front of me in his shirt, all dripping wet. He was evidently quite upset about the worry he had caused us all. I didn't feel like nagging him any further. I simply stood there without saying a word, not knowing how to begin. Volodya was the first to speak. 
"You see, Papa, Grandfather told me that these nuclear waste facilities are extremely dangerous. According to probability theory; they can do irreparable harm to many countries and the people living in them. And to our whole planet, besides." 
"They can, of course, but what's this got to do with you?" "What this means is, if people think the problem is solved, but the danger still remains, it means they have not come up with the correct solution." 
"So, what if it is incorrect - what does it matter?" 
"Grandfather said that it is up to me to find the correct 
solution." 
"So... have you found it?" "I have now, Papa." 
There he was, standing before me, my nine-year-old son, soaking wet and with an injured hand, but entirely confident in himself. And speaking in a calm and confident tone of voice about how to solve the problem of storing nuclear waste. An altogether peculiar situation! After all, he is no scientist, no nuclear physicist and doesn't even study in a regular school. Most peculiar! Here is this boy standing in his wet clothing on the shore of a taiga lake and discussing the safe storage of nuclear waste. Not counting on any kind of effective solution on his part, I asked, simply in the interests of keeping the conversation going: 
"Well, what specific conclusions have you corne to regarding this insoluble problem?" 
"Out of all the possible variants, I think the most effective 
is deconcentration." 
"I'm not sure what you mean - deconcentration of what? "Of nuclear waste, Papa." 
"How so?" 
"I carne to the realisation, Papa, that radiation in small doses is not at all dangerous. It is present in small quantities everywhere - in us, in plants, in the water and the clouds. But the real danger comes when too much is concentrated in one place. In the nuclear facilities Grandfather was telling me about, a whole lot of radioactive objects are concentrated together in one place." 
"Well, everybody knows that. Radioactive waste is hauled to specially constructed storage facilities, which are carefully protected from terrorists. They've got specially trained personnel who ensure there are no violations of proper storage technology." 
"Quite right, Papa. But the danger still exists. And a catastrophe is inevitable, caused by someone's specific thought imposing a wrong decision on people." 
"You know, this problem, son, is being investigated in scientific institutes by highly qualified specialists. You're not a scholar, you haven't studied science, and so you're not capable of solving such an important question. It's modern science that ought to come up with an answer." 
"But what has been the result, Papa? After all, it is precisely the inventions of modern science that have caused people to be subjected to great danger. Of course I do not study in school, and I do not know the science you are talking about, but... " 
He fell silent and lowered his head. 
"What does that 'but' of yours mean? Why did you stop, Volodya?" 
"I have no desire, Papa, to be a pupil in that school or to study the science you have in mind." 
"Why not?" 
"Because, Papa, that kind of science is what leads to disasters." 
"But there's no other kind of science." 
"There is. 'Reality should be determined only through one's own self,' says Mama Anastasia. I understand what that means, and I am studying, or 'determining'. At the moment I do not know how to put it more specifically." 
WOw! How sure he is of his convictions! I thought. Then I asked: ''And what is the probability of disaster, as you see it?" 
''A. hundred percent." 
"You're certain of that?" 
''A.ccording to probability theory and the absence of any counteraction to destructive thought, a disaster is inevitable. The construction of large nuclear storage facilities can be compared to the construction of huge bombs." 
''And am I to guess that your thought has begun counteracting this destructive element?" 
"Yes, I have launched my thought into space. And it will triumph." 
"Specifically, what solution has your thought come up with regarding the problem of the safe storage of nuclear waste?" ''All nuclear waste concentrated in large facilities needs to be deconcentrated that is my thought." 
"Deconcentration - does that mean dividing it into fragments a hundred thousandth or a multi-millionth in size?" 
"That is right, Papa." 
''A simple solution. But the big question remains: where to store these tiny fragments?" 
"On kin's domains, Papa." 
For a moment the shock of this incredible statement completely overwhelmed me - I didn't know what to say. Then I practically shouted: 
"Nonsense! That's utter nonsense you've thought up, Volodya." 
After I'd thought about it a little more, I said in a calmer VOIce: 
"Of course, if nuclear fragments are deconcentrated and spread among various places, a global catastrophe can be averted. But this will also put millions of families who have decided to live on these domains in danger. After all, everybody wants to live in a place that's environmentally clean." 
"Yes, Papa, everybody wants to live in an environmentally clean place. But there are hardly any such places remaining on the Earth today." 
''And here in the taiga, isn't this environmentally clean either?" 
"The environment here is relatively clean. But it is not ideal, not pristine. There are no ideal spots left, anywhere. Clouds can bring their acid rain here too, from a variety of places. The 
I5 
grass and trees and bushes are coping with it for the time being, but the filthy places are becoming only filthier with each passing day. And the number of such places keeps growing with each passing day. That is why it is essential right now not to walk away from this filthiness, but attack it. 'We need to create clean places ourselves' - that is what Mama says. 
"From all the possible variants my thought selected just one. It could not come up with any other. My thought tells me it is safer to deconcentrate and tame the waste one fragment at a time, and derive a benefit for life on our planet by storing a tiny fragment on one's domain." 
"But where on the domain? In a larder? In a safe? Store this radioactive capsule in an underground cellar? Has your thought given you any hint of this yet?" 
"The capsule should be buried underground no less than nine metres deep." 
I spent some time thinking about my son's proposal, which had indeed seemed incredible at first, but the more I thought about it, the more inclined I became to accept that there was some grain of reason in what he said. At the very least, his proposal for nuclear waste storage would be entirely sufficient to avert a large-scale catastrophe. As to pollution on the given domain, that was something that could indeed be avoided, and there might even be a plus side. Perhaps scientists could come up with something like a mini-reactor - or something similar. 
And then, all at once a thought dawned on me. Wow! Here was another reason for the need to deconcentrate the storage of radioactive waste. Money! 
Huge sums are being doled out by foreign governments for the storage of such waste. It is these funds that pay for constructing the facilities, maintaining service personnel and whole security control systems. And a part of this money inevitably disappears into the unknown. Why not pay it, 
instead, to every domain where radioactive waste capsules are stored? Fantastic! Not only would 'safe contamination' be guaranteed, but people would earn money besides. 
At the present time nobody can guarantee security from contamination even for those living far away from the storage facilities. Think what happened at Chernobyf - the contamination affected not just parts of Ukrainian territory, but of Russia and Belarus as well. Clouds can carry the pollution for hundreds and even thousands of kilometres. 
So, even though it is still at the conceptual stage and the details need fleshing out, my son's proposal deserves serious consideration not just on the part of the academic world, but from governments, and especially the public. 
I was walking along the lakeshore, immersed in my thoughts, and had quite forgot about my son. He was still standing at the same spot, silently watching me. His upbringing forbade him from being the first to reinitiate our conversation. To interrupt the thought of a Man in contemplation was unthinkable. 
I decided to change the subject. 
"So, you spend your time thinking about different problems, Volodya. Don't you have any duties to carry out? Have you been assigned any work to perform?" 
"Work?.. Assigned?.. I always do what I feel like doing. 
Work? What do you mean by the word work, Papa?" 
"Well, work is when you carry out some kind of task, and people pay you money for it. Or when you do something that's going to benefit your whole family. Take me, for 
"Cbemobyt = a town in northern Ukraine with a nuclear-power generating station. In April 1986 an accident at Reactor N° 4 caused one of Europe's worst environmental disasters, spreading dangerous radiation over a huge land area. As a result of the accident, the population ofChernobyl (13, 000 people) and nearby Pripiat' (49, 000) was evacuated, and these towns, as well as the larger surrounding area, are now uninhabited. 
example - when I was your age, my parents assigned me to look after our bunny-rabbits. And that's what I did. I would collect grass for them, feed them, clean their cages... And the rabbits brought our family a bit of income." 
After hearing me out, Volodya suddenly said with some excitement: 
"Papa, I shall tell you about one particular duty which I assigned to myself - a very enjoyable duty. Only you'll have to judge whether it can be called work or not." 
"Tell me about it." 
"Then let's go. I have a specific place I want to showyou." 
CHAPTER THREE 
"G "I 
oosey, goosey, ga-ga-ga. or 
The superknowledge we are losing 
We started heading off from the lake, Volodya leading the way. He had changed somehow. His analytical and concentrated mood had given way to one of joyfulness and excitement. Sometimes he would do a pirouette as he walked along, or a little leap into the air, as he explained to me: 
"I never looked after bunny-rabbits, Papa. I did something else. I am not sure what to call it - gave birth? That will not do. Created? Not really... Ah, now I remember. I think in your civilisation it is called sitting on eggs. So, I sat on some eggs." 
"What d'you mean, you sat on some eggs? That's a mother 
hen's job, or some other kind ofbird's." 
"Yes, I know. But in my case I had to sit on them myself" "What for? Tell me everything, in the proper order." 
''All right, in the proper order. Well, it happened in this order: 
"I asked Grandfather to find me some eggs laid by wild ducks and wild geese. At first Grandfather grumbled a bit, but three days later he brought me four large goose eggs, along with five duck eggs, which were smaller. 
"Next in order, I dug a little hole in the ground, and put some deer manure in the bottom along with grass stalks, and then I 
lGoosey, goDsey, ga-ga-ga - the first line of a popular Russian folk song. The song accompanies a children's game in which a group of children (representing a flock of geese) are fleeing home from their feeding grounds while another child (as a wolf) tries to catch them. 
"Goosey, goosey, ga-ga-ga" 
covered them over with dried grass, and then on top of this I placed the two sets of eggs Grandfather had brought me." 
"What was the manure for?" 
"For warmth. Eggs need warmth to hatch. And they need warmth from above, too. Sometimes I lay down on the ground myself, covering the hole with my stomach. When it was cold or rainy, I assigned this task to the bear." 
"How did the bear keep from crushing the eggs?" 
"You see, even though the bear is big, the hole containing the eggs is pretty small. He lay on top of the hole, and the eggs were at the bottom. Sometimes I would have the she-wolf guard the eggs, at other times I would sleep on the ground nearby myself, until they started to hatch. It was so wonderful to watch them hatching. Not all of them made it, though. From the nine eggs I started with, were born two goslings and three ducklings, I fed them grass seed and crushed nuts and gave them water to drink. Whenever I fed them, I would invite various creatures living on our territory to watch." 
"What for?" 
"To show them how I cared for the little chicks, to help them understand that they should not touch them, but that they should protect them instead. I would also sleep beside the hole where the goslings and ducldings were born, except on cold or rainy nights when I had the bear take over for me. The chicks nestled in his warm coat, which made it very nice for them. 
"Next, if I am to proceed in the proper order: I put up stakes around the hole with which I made a wicker fence from branches, and put branches above the nest as well. As the goslings and ducldings grew and learnt to climb out of their hole, I would walk around their nest and make short whistling sounds: tsu-tsu-tsu. Upon hearing this, they would immediately climb out and run after me. They tried running after the bear, but I trained them out of it. The bear can travel quite a distance, and the birds might not make it in one piece. 
"But nothing happened to them. They grew up, feathers appeared, and they learnt to fly. I would toss them up in the air to help them along. Then they began flying off on their own, but always returned to their nest. 
"When autumn came and a whole lot of birds started gathering in flocks to fly south, my grown-up ducks attached themselves to a whole flock of ducks, and my geese joined a flock of geese, and they all flew off to warmer climes. 
"But I guessed - I was almost certain - that they would return in the spring. And they did. Oh, how fantastic that was, Papa! They came back, and I heard their delightful cry: ga-ga-ga. I ran over to their nest and began calling: tsu-tsutsu. I fed them grass seed and some nut kernels which I had ground up beforehand. They took the feed right out of my hands. I was so happy, and all the creatures around heard the cry and came running oh so happily... 
"Look, Papa, here we are! Look!" 
There in a secluded spot between two currant bushes I saw the nest my son had fashioned. But there was no wildlife to be seen anywhere around. 
"You say they've come back, but there aren't any birds here." 
"Not at the moment. They have flown off somewhere to have a stroll or look for food. That is why they are not here right now, but look, Papa!" 
As Volodya pushed the branches aside to widen the opening, I caught a glimpse of three nest holes. In one of them lay five small-sized eggs, probably, duck eggs. In the other, just one, slightly larger - a goose egg. 
"Wow! That means they have come back. And they're laying eggs. Only just a few." 
"Yes!" Volodya exclaimed in excitement. "They have come back and are laying eggs. They could lay more if I took some of the eggs out of the nest and fed the mothers more often." 
I looked at my son's happy face, but could not fully comprehend the reason for his joyful excitement. I asked him:"What are you so fantastically happy about, Volodya? I know none of you - either you or your Mama or your grandfather - eat eggs. Which means that your actions cannot be called 'work' or a 'job', since there's no practical benefit from it." 
"You think so? But remember, other people eat bird's eggs. 
Mama says it is all right to use anything the animals themselves give to Man. Especially for people who are not accustomed to a vegetarian diet." 
"What have other people got to do with your activities here?" 
"I have decided that something needs to be done so that people living on their domains can be free from the burden of so many household tasks. Or almost free. So that they can have time to think and reflect. This is possible - if you understand God's intent in creating our world. I find delight in the science of getting to know His thoughts. It is certainly the grandest science of all, and it is something that must be known. 
"We need to learn, for example, why He made the birds fly south in the autumn, but they do not stay in those warmer climes, but come back in the spring. I have thought a lot about this, and have guessed that He did this so that Man would not be burdened during the wintertime. In winter birds cannot find food for themselves, and they flyaway But they do not stay in the south, but come back - they want to be useful to Man. This is God's intent. There is much for Man to learn from what our Creator has conceived." 
"What you're suggesting, then, Volodya, is that ducks and geese can live in every domain, lay their eggs, feed themselves, and then fly off in the autumn and come back in the spring?" 
"Yes, quite right. After all, it worked with me." 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
"Yes, I see - it really did work with you. But there's just one concern I have... It will probably upset you to hear this, but still, I have to tell you the truth. Just so you don't go looking ridiculous with your proposal." 
"Tell me the truth, Papa." 
"You see, there's this science we call economics. Economists are trying to figure out what is the best way of handling the production of various goods - in this case, eggs. In our world a lot of chicken farms have been set up, where a whole bunch of chickens are kept in one place. They lay their eggs, and afterward these eggs are shipped off to grocery stores. People can go to these stores and easily purchase as many eggs as they need. It's all worked out to ensure the least expenditure oflabour and time on a per-unit basis." 
"What does 'expenditure of labour' mean, Papa?" 
"It refers to the quantity of time and resources spent on the production of a single egg. You have to carefully work out what's going to be the most efficient method of production, and that will be the best method." 
"Fine, I shall try to work it out, Papa." 
"When you work out the whole thing, you'll understand. 
But to figure it out you'll need expense statistics. I'll try to get them from some economist." 
"But I can calculate everything right now, Papa." 
Volodya gave a bit of a frown, evidently concentrating, and 
after a minute announced: 
"Minus two to infinity." 
"What kind of a formula is that? What does it refer to?" "The efficiency of the Divine economy is expressed in an 
infinite series of numbers. Even starting from zero, modern scientific economics is already two points down." 
"You've got a pretty strange method of calculation there. 
I can't fathom it. Can you explain how you arrived at that figure?" 
"Goosey, goosey, ga-ga-ga" 
"I set the benchmark for our current case at zero. All the expenses involved in a chicken factory - its construction, maintenance and delivery of eggs to stores are summed up in the figure of minus one." 
"What d'you mean, 'minus one'? These expenses should be expressed in roubles and kopeks." 
"Monetary units are relative and will always vary, and so they are not significant in this methodology. They all need to be lumped together under the arbitrary value of 'minus one'. Whatever expenses there are, in terms of a zero benchmark, they can be expressed as 'minus one'." 
''And where did you get the second minus figure?" 
"That is quality. It cannot be very good. The unnatural maintenance conditions and the lack of variety in feed cannot help but lower the quality of the eggs, and this gives rise to another value of minus one. So we get 'minus two' altogether." 
"Okay, let's say you're right. But in your case, too, there are huge expenditures of time. Here, tell me, Volodya, how much time did you spend, as you put it, 'sitting on' the eggs, and then feeding the ducklings and goslings, and watching out for them?" 
"Ninety days and nights." 
"So, ninety times twenty-four hours. And all that in aid of producing no more than a few dozen eggs - and that only at the end of a year! For people living in their domains, it would be much more efficient to buy some little chicks at a market or hatch them over the winter with the help of an electric incubator, and in four or five months they'll start laying. In the 
2kopek (Russian: kopeika) - a coin worth ilioc: of a rouble. It is derived from the Russian word for 'spear' (kop~, pronounced kap-YO), in reference to a warrior piercing a dragon with his spear - a scene depicted on early Russian coins. The word 'rouble' itself is derived from the verb rubit' ('cut with an axe') - early coins represented a silver band cut in rectangular pieces. 
second year, before winter sets in, they're generally slaughtered, since their laying capacity goes down by the third year. So they kill them and start raising a new batch. That's technology for you." 
"That is the technology of never-ending burdens, Papa. 
You have to feed the chickens every day, store up food for the winter, and every other year raise a new batch of chickens." 
"Sure, you feed them and raise new ones, but thanks to modern technology it isn't nearly as time-consuming as your alternative. " 
"But those ninety days will launch a programme that will last forever. Once they come back, the migratory birds will raise their young all by themselves, they will teach them how to get along with human beings and come back to their homeland. And they will go on doing this for thousands of years. In launching a programme like this, Man is passing it on to future generations of his family. He is giving back to them a little particle of the Divine economy. A hundred years from now an expenditure of ninety days in calculating the cost of producing a single egg, will count as minutes, and continue to diminish with each passing year." 
"But still, there are expenses, and you haven't taken these into account." 
"These expenses are offset by a powerful counterweight, which is no less significant than what is produced by the birds." 
"What counterweight?" 
"When birds once again fly from faraway lands back to their native woods and fields, people are delighted to see them. Thanks to their joyful and beneficial energy, many people's diseases are eliminated. But this energy is ninety times stronger when they do not merely fly back from the south, but come directly to you and start greeting the Man living on that domain with their happy cries and refrains of exultation. 
Their singing brings joy and strength not only to Man but to the whole Space around him." 
Volodya spoke with confidence and inspiration. It would have seemed foolish to continue arguing with him. I pretended to be absorbed in contemplation or to be figuring out something in my mind. I felt a little put out that there was nothing I could teach my son or even offer him a few hints on. 
And what kind of upbringing or education do we have here anyway? Here is my son standing right in front of me, and yet he seems like a child from another planet or another civilisation. 
He has a different concept of life, a different philosophy and speed of thought. He can do instantaneous calculations. And it is clear, as I have been made aware, that even if! spent a year on computer calculations, whatever he comes up with would still be more accurate. It's as though everything inside him were turned upside-down. Or perhaps it might be more accurate to ask: To what degree have we perverted our own lives - our concepts and meaning of life? All our disasters have arisen from these perversions. 
No doubt this is all true, but still... I'm so anxious to find some way of being useful to my son. But how? With no expectations left, I asked him quietly and offhandedly: 
"I'll give some thought to those economics of yours. Maybe you're right... But tell me, son: you've been playing with different tasks here, working them out. Have you ever had a really serious problem to meet?" 
Volodya sighed deeply and, it seemed, rather woefully. 
After a brief pause he replied: 
"Yes, Papa, I do have a big problem. And only you can help me solve it." 
Volodya was sad, while I, on the other hand, was delighted to find something at last where he required my help. 
''And what does it involve, this big problem of yours?" 
A big problem 
"Remember, Papa, when I told you last time you were here that I was preparing to go off into your world when I grew Up?"3 
"Yes, I remember. You said you would come into our world and find yourself a Universe Girl to make her happy. You'd build a kin's domain with her, and raise children together. I remember your telling me. So, you haven't abandoned your project?" 
"Not at all. And I often think of the future, about that girl and the domain. I can picture in detail how she and I will live there together. And how you and Mama will come visit and see how the dream which that girl and I co-created together is being turned into reality." 
"Well, then, what's your problem? Are you afraid you might not find your girl?" 
"That is not the problem. I shall look for this girl and find her. Come, I shall show you another little glade. And you will see it all for yourself- you will sense what the problem is." 
Volodya and I arrived at a small glade located right next door to Anastasia's. When we reached the middle of the glade, we stopped, and Volodya invited me to sit down on the ground. Then, cupping his hands around his mouth, he gave out a loud and extended cry: A -a-a-a! First he cried out in one direction, then another and yet another. In just two or three 
3See Book 6, Chapter 2: "Conversation with my son", especially the section "I shall make a Universe Girl happy". 
minutes there began a rustling in the treetops all around the glade, and a whole lot of squirrels could be seen leaping from branch to branch, gathering together on a single cedar tree. Some of them simply sat down on one of the branches and stared in our direction, while others - apparently the more restless ones - continued hopping from one branch to another. 
A few minutes later and out of the bushes came running three wolves. They sat down at the edge of the glade and also began looking our way. 
A sable came along and took up a position about three metres from the wolves. Then two goats appeared. They didn't sit down, but stood at the edge of the glade, their eyes fixed on us. Soon afterward came a deer. The last to arrive was a huge bear, noisily making his way through the bushes. He too sat down at the edge of the glade, panting all the while, saliva dripping from his tongue. He had probably been a long ways off and had had to run for some distance. 
All this time Volodya stood behind my back, with his hands on my shoulders. Then he took a few paces back from me and picked some herbs. Coming back to me, he said: 
"Open your mouth, Papa, and I shall give you some herbs to eat. This is so they can see that I am feeding you from my hand, and will not be upset at the sight of a stranger." 
I took the proffered herbs in my mouth and began to chew. 
Volodya sat down beside me, put his head up against my chest and said: 
"Stroke my hair, Papa, so that they will fully calm down." 
I began stroking his light-brown hair with delight. Then he sat down beside me and began to explain. 
"I realised, Papa, that God created the whole world as a cradle for His son, Man. The plants, the air, the water and clouds - everything has been created for Man. And the creatures stand ready to serve Man with great delight. But we 
have forgotten, and now it is important to understand what services the creatures can perform, what their purpose and destiny is. Even today a lot of people are aware that a dog can guard the house, find lost objects, and aid in keeping one's home safe from intruders. A cat, of course, can catch the mice that raid the larder. A horse is transportation. But all the other creatures have a specific feature and designation, too, which should be understood. I have tried the best I could to determine the function of all that you see here. 
"Now they are sitting there and awaiting my command. 
This is the third year now I have been working with them to understand their putpose. Take, for example, the bear. Because of his big and powerful paws, he can dig an underground cellar, put supplies in it to save for the winter and dig them up again in the spring. He knows how to bring honey from a tree hollow." 
"Yes, I know, Volodya. Anastasia told me that at one time people used bears as household help." 
"Mama told me that, too. But look what I have taught the bear to do." 
Volodya rose to his feet and stretched out his right arm in the bear's direction. The bear drew himself up on his haunches, and even seemed to stop breathing. When Volodya clapped his hand against his thigh, the huge bear took several giant strides and lay down at the boy's feet. Volodya squatted down beside the beast's enormous head, gave it a slap and began scratching behind the creature's ear. The bear purred with pleasure. When Volodya got up, the bear did the same, watching the boy's every move. 
Volodya went over to the edge of the glade, where he found a dry branch, and stuck it into the ground about ten metres from where I was sitting. Then he returned to the edge and approached a small cedar tree about a metre high. He touched it and clapped his hands twice. Right off, the bear ran over to 
the cedar and sniffed it. And then an incredible thing started to happen. 
My son sat down beside me on the grass and the two of us began watching as the scene unfolded before our eyes. 
The bear spent some time sniffing the little cedar. First he would walk away from it, as though measuring something, then he would run over to the spot where Volodya's dry branch was sticking up. And all around the branch he suddenly began scraping away the earth with his front paws. 
Working furiously with his paws and their powerful claws, in the space of a few minutes he had dug a hole approximately 80 ern in diameter and about half a metre deep. He stopped to admire his handiwork, and even stuck his head into the pit, probably to sniff it. 
After that the bear ran over to the cedar Volodya had indicated, and began to dig out the earth around it. When he had dug what amounted to a circular trench, the bear sat down on his hind paws next to the cedar, dug his front paws into the trench and pulled the little tree out of the ground, along with a sizeable clump of earth. Rising on his hind legs, he held the clump between his front paws and headed over to the hole he had dug earlier. He carefully sat down and lowered the clump with the cedar into the hole. It turned out the hole was about 15 cm larger than required. The bear backed off to take a look at his handiwork. Once more he pulled out the cedar and set it to one side, while he filled in the hole just a little more, before replanting the cedar. Now everything was just right. 
The bear backed away to once more inspect his accomplishment. This time he was apparently satisfied, as he went back to the cedar he had planted and began filling in the crevice around the clump from which the tree was growing. He used his paw to scoop up the earth, stuff it into the crevice and then pack it down around the newly replanted tree. 
It was quite a fascinating scene, but I had earlier witnessed how the squirrels brought dried mushrooms and nuts for Anas tasia, 4 or how the wolves played with Anastasia and protected her from wild dogs.' 
Not only that, but a lot of people can observe all sorts of tricks with various animals just by attending a circus performance. My own dog Kedra6 also takes delight in carrying out a range of commands. 
What I witnessed in the taiga glade also bore outward similarities to a circus performance, except that it didn't take place in an arena surrounded by a high net, but in natural surroundings. And the performers were not circus animals living in confined cages, but free - or 'wild', as we call them - dwellers in the taiga. They might well have seemed wild to us, but to my son they were simply friends and helpers. Just like our household pets and farm animals. 
However, I must point out one mysterious and incredible distinction in particular: the loyalty of household pets and farm animals can be explained by the fact that Man gives them food and drink and provides shelter. People who go see animal acts at circuses may also notice that after each successful trick the tamer rewards the lion or tiger, giving them some kind of treat or trifle he keeps on his belt or in his pocket just for that purpose. 
Circus animals which spend years confined in cages have no opportunity to hunt for their own food. They are fully dependent on Man. By contrast, the creatures here in the taiga are absolutely free and fully capable of finding food and shelter on their own. Yet still they come - not just come, but 
"See, for example, Book I, Chapter 6: "Anastasia's morning". 5See, for example, Book 3, Chapter 12: "Man-made mutants". 
Kedra _ a name derived from ked,. (the Russian word for 'cedar' or 'Siberian pine'). 
make an enthusiastic dash to respond to Man's call and carry out his commands. They carry them out with considerable desire and even servility. Why? What do they get in return? Volodya gave no food to the bear. But still, the bear's joy was many times more clearly evident than that shown by the circus animals upon receiving their treat. 
The bear that transplanted the little tree on Volodya's command stood there shifting from paw to paw, his eyes fixed on the boy; as though he wanted to repeat the action or perform some other task. It is strange how this huge taiga bear really wants to keep on doing something for Man, and for a child at that. 
Volodya was not about to set the bear any new task. He gestured the bear to come over, grasped the fur on the bear's muzzle with both hands, ruffled it a bit, then petted the muzzle and said: 
"You're a super helper - not like the goats." 
The bear purred with delight. This threatening creature sounded as though it was at the very pinnacle of bliss. 
Anastasia has said: 
"Such beneficial energy can flow from Man as has never before been seen. Every living creature on the Earth needs this energy just as it needs air, sunshine and water. And even sunlight is but a reflection of the great energy emanating from Man." 
Our sciences have discovered a multitude of diverse energies and even brought about the artificial generation of electrical energy. They have split the atom and manufactured bombs. But how far (and in what direction) have our sciences advanced in studying the more significant and important question as to the energy emanating from Man himself? Is there any tendency toward studying this energy at all, including its mysterious capabilities? Or studying Man's abilities in general, and his function in both our world and the Universe? 
Perhaps someone is trying by whatever means available to hinder Man from knowing himself And I mean actual hindering. 
It cannot be, it cannot possibly be Man's destiny to spend years sitting in a casino or at a bar for a shot of vodka, or drudging away at a cash register in some store or at a manager's desk in some office. And even a supermodel, or a president, or a pop-star none of them come even close to Man's most important purpose. 
And yet it is these very professions of our modern age, along with making money; that some enigmatic 'entity' is promoting today as the most important thing in Man's life. It's what we see in a good many of our films and TV shows, which concentrate on everything except the meaning of life. All they do is turn Man into a banana-head. 
Isn't that the reason wars are happening all over the place? 
And the Earth is becoming more and more polluted? And people lose their sense of direction, they see no purpose in living, and so they take to vodka and drugs. 
Who is supposed to stop all this rot that is taking place with our Earth? Science? But science isn't saying anything. Religion? Which religion? Where are the resul ts? Maybe everyone needs to ponder this for themselves? Ponder it! For themselves! 
To ponder, one must first think. But where? When? Our lives have become one giant bustle from morning 'til night. 
Every single attempt that has ever been made to ponder the meaning oflife has been suddenly aborted. Selling magazines featuring half-naked sensuous bodies - oh, sure! Savouring sexual perversion - oh, sure! Showing and telling about the beastly antics of pervert-maniacs - oh, sure! Writing and talking about prostitutes in the media - oh, sure! 
But there is less and less talk about the meaning of Man's life and Man's purpose - it's becoming more and more a taboo topic. 
I glanced up from my contemplations to look at my son. He was sitting on the grass beside me, watching me intently. I thought he might have something more he wanted to show me. I asked him: 
''And what was it you were saying to the bear about goats, Volodya?" 
"1 cannot, for the life of me, Papa, determine what their 
. " 
purpose IS. 
"What's there to determine? Everyone knows what goats are for - to give milk to Man." 
"Yes, milk, of course. But perhaps there is something more they can be taught." 
"What more could they possibly.. .? Why bother looking for something else?" 
"1 have been watching them. Goats are capable of stripping bark off trees and stumps. And they can bite off branches from bushes. If you let them into a domain, they could cause harm to the plants. To stop that from happening, I am trying to teach them to trim the hedges around the domains." 
"Trim?" 
"Yes, Papa, trim. After all, people trim hedges to make them more beautiful - either in a straight line or in different shapes. Grandfather told me you call it landscape design, or topiary art. But the goats do not seem to have any concept of what 1 want them to do." 
''And how are you teaching them?" "1 shall show you." 
Volodya reached for a rope made of nettle fibres woven together, about three metres long. He fastened one end to a small tree and stretched the rope through a clump of bushes. Then, gesturing the two little goats to approach, he gave each of them a pat. He touched the bushes with his hand and even snapped off a small branch himself with his teeth. He said 
something to the goats, and they set about vigorously gnawing off the bushy branches. Each time they neared the rope border, Volodya would give several tugs on the rope and make some disapproving sounds. The goats would stop for a time, holding their snouts up and looking enquiringly at the boy; but then go back to biting off the branches, paying no attention to the rope. 
"You see, Papa, it is not working. They do not realise they are supposed to trim the bushes in an even line." 
"Yes, I see. Is that the problem you were talking about?" "That is not the main problem, Papa. It is something else." 
"Then what?" 
"You noticed, Papa, how happily the different creatures came running to my call?" 
"Yes, I did."
"I have been working with them for several years now, and they have become accustomed to communicating with me, but only with me. They look forward to this interchange, they want to be petted. But once I go off into your world, they will miss me. They will miss not having a Man ever come to see them again, or call them and give them something to do. I feel that the communication with Man and serving Man has become the most significant focus in their life." 
"Couldn't they communicate with Anastasia?" 
"Mama has her own circle, her own creatures she is friends with. Besides, she is very busy and does not have time for all of them. 
"But, you see, these... " - and here once again Volodya pointed to the creatures still sitting around the edge of the glade - these I chose myself, and I am the only one who has been working with them these past few years. 
"Three months ago I asked Grandfather to be present with me at all our training sessions. Grandfather muttered, but he 
"Goosey, goosey, ga-ga-ga" 
35 
was always there beside me. But recently he told me he would be unable to replace me." 
"Why?" 
"He said he did not have the same interest as I had in animal-training. And once again he began to mutter that I should not have spent so much time with the animals individually. And that I should not have given them so much petting. And he reminded me that these creatures look upon me not only as their leader, but as their child, too, since the older among them saw me when I was a baby and even nursed me. You see, I made some kind of mistake, and now I must definitely correct it. Only now I am no longer able to correct it allan my own." 
I looked at the creatures still sitting at the edge of the glade. They gave every indication that they were waiting for Volodya to give them some sort of instructions or to do something with them. I imagined how they would miss him if he were to go away. The same way my dog Kedra misses me when I have to leave my home in the country for days or weeks at a time. She has a warm little doghouse and I don't keep her chained up - she's free to roam the fields or the forest or the village. And I have a neighbour who feeds her every day. He makes kasha7 for her, and gives her bones to chew on. But my neighbour tells me: 
"She misses you, Vladimir Nikolaevich. She'll often sit by the gate and gaze down the road you come home on. And sometimes she'll whimper." 
And whenever I arrive, Kedra rushes headlong to greet me, rubs against my legs, and sometimes she's so enthusiastic she'll jump right up and try to lick my face, soiling my clothes 
7 hasba - a traditional Russian and Eastern European porridge made with wheat, buckwheat and other grains. 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
with her dirty paws. And there's no way I can train her to be not quite so ebullient in expressing her emotions. 
But these creatures in the glade... All the time we talked they sat there quietly watching us, looking the picture of composure. What do they want? After all, nobody is making them sit that way or wait on some kind of command from Man. 
My God... A thought all at once bubbled up with absolute clarity and struck my heart. It was much more than just about these creatures sitting in a taiga glade - it was the realisation that all the creatures on the Earth have a specific purpose and await contact with the highest being on the planet, namely, Man. They have been created to help Man fulfil his supreme mission. Like all life on the planet, they were created by God to help Man realise his grand destiny... But Man... 
I looked at the creatures in the glade and began to realise that my son really did have a serious problem on his hands: he could not simply abandon these creatures. Nor could he bring himself to give up his dream about the girl he would be setting up a domain with. 
"Yes, Volodya, that really is a problem," I told my son. 
"Doesn't look as though there's any solution. Not one we can find." 
"There is a solution, Papa, but it does not depend on me." "On whom, then?" 
"You are the only one who can solve this problem, Papa." "Me? And just how am I supposed to do that? There's 
nothing I can do here, son." 
37 
There is a solution 
"I think, Papa, that you will be able to help me if you really want to," said Volodya quietly. 
"You think so? But, you see, I have no idea what to do. You may think so, but I have no idea." 
I was still sitting on the grass, while Volodya stood in front of me, looking me in the eye with some kind of an imploring gaze, his lips whispering something inaudible. I could tell by his lips that he was saying one particular word over and over again. Then, without taking his eyes away, he said it distinctly: 
"Sis-ter. I earnestly beg of you, Papa, to bear me a sister, together with Mama. I shall nurse her and raise her myself They will help me. We shall not distract you and Mama from your activities. I shall teach her, when she grows a little. I shall tell her about everything. She will remain here with my creatures and my Space. 
"Bear me a sister, together with Mama. Unless, of course, you are ill... or are too tired. That is, of course, if you can. Grandfather told me that men in your world often get ill and grow older faster because of the way of life there, the air not fit to breathe and the foul water. You are a little past fifty years old, Papa. But if you are tired, Papa... If your strength is pretty much exhausted... Then spend three days with me. Just three days. I have everything all prepared, and a great deal of strength will be restored to you." 
My son was excited, and I interrupted him. 
"Wait, Volodya, calm down. Of course I'm a little tired. 
But I think I'll have enough strength. That's not the point. In principle I have nothing against giving you a sister, but when it comes to bearing children, a desire on the part of both parents is required." 
"I am sure of it, Papa. I know for certain that Mama will not refuse. If you agree, let us not waste any time, but begin right now to prepare for the birth of my sister. I have been studying up on it. Grandfather has helped me a great deal. I have made calculations and have everything prepared. Stay with me three days and three nights, and do not go off anywhere, and do not get distracted by anything, Papa. Your energy and strength will increase." 
"What makes you think I don't have enough energy or strength, Volodya?" 
"I think you have enough, but you shall have more." "Okay; I shall spend all three days with you alone, but we must go and let Mama know." 
"I shall explain everything to her myself, Papa. I shall tell her we have a common project. She will not go into specifics and will not object." 
"Well, all right, then, let's get started." 
I even began to wonder what my son had prepared that would restore a great deal of strength and energy to Man after only three days. And I shall say right off that the procedures he prepared may seem rather strange, but the sensation resulting from them on the third day defies explanation in words or writing. 
It wouldn't be appropriate, either, to say that a Man becomes ten or twenty years younger, though he may indeed look as much as five years younger. But on the inside... Somehow everything inside me seemed to be working differently Not only did I have new strength, but the world around me seemed just a bit different. 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Rejuvenation 
First ordeal 
No sooner had I agreed to follow through with the procedures thought up by my son than he signalled the assembled creatures to go away. He grasped hold of my hand, and we ran down to the lake. Volodya stopped several times along the way to pick herbs in various places, which he softened and rolled into a ball. When the ball was ready, he instructed me to eat it, which I did. And in just a few minutes I noticed a heavy drip of snot exuding from my nose and I began to vomit. It seemed that all my stomach juices had been pumped out. I was unable to speak for all the vomiting, while Volodya explained: 
"That is good, Papa. Do not be afraid. It is good for all that useless stuff to come out of you. Only a pure state will remain. This is what they do in cases of poisoning." 
I was physically unable to offer any kind of answer, but thought to myself: That's true: poisoning victims drink tablets which produce nausea and vomiting. There are laxatives, of course - castor oil, for example. But wbat do I need this ordeal for? I bauen't been poisoned. 
As though he had tuned in to my question, Volodya explained: 
"You, of course, have not been poisoned, Papa, but the food you have been consuming is right on the verge of having a poisoning effect. Just let go of everything filthy inside you." 
After the vomiting and the discharge of the phlegm from my nose, along with a copious flow of tears from my eyes, 
I began having a series of soft bowel movements, and five times I ended up running into the bushes for a lengthy period. The whole procedure lasted two to three hours. Then carne relief. 
"Now do you feel better, Papa? Better than before? Eh?" "Yes," I affirmed. 
Second ordeal 
Volodya once again took hold of my hand and off we ran. When we reached the shore of the lake, he instructed me to wash myself and swim around a bit. Upon corning out of the water, I noticed him extracting a clay jar from a hole in the ground, about a litre and a half in size. 
"Now; Papa, you need to drink this water. It is called dead tuater - because it contains very few microbes. This water should not be drunk if the air is polluted. But we have pure air here, so it is all right to drink dead water. It will rinse your insides and cleanse them, and wash out a lot of microbes and bacteria from your body. Drink as much as you can, Papa. When you have drunk up this whole jar, I shall give you another, and when you have finished that I shall give you a third jar, containing living water. And all the microbes and bacteria you need will be restored in a balance that is just right for you." 
I should point out right off that Volodya and his family consider dead water to be that found at great depths below the Earth's surface and containing a minimum of bacteria. I believe our mineral water in bottles is precisely what they call 
4I 
dead water. In any case, I think all of our drinking water is dead water, and that is why our children suffer from disbacteriosis, especially newborns. 
Living water, on the other hand, they consider to be surface water from pure streams or bodies of water, a few of which have indeed been preserved in the depths of the Siberian taiga. 
There's something I wish to emphasise here. Grandfather later explained to me that spring water is not considered living water when you drink it right out of the spring. To be considered 'living water', it must first be kept for three hours or so in a wooden or clay vessel with a wide neck. 
"Living water needs to absorb sunlight," he said. "With the aid of sunlight, organisms are generated which are indispensable to human life. You call them microbes and bacteria." 
Then the water should stand in the shade for at least another three hours. After that it can be drunk as 'living water'. 
Third ordeal 
"So take a drink whenever you feel like it, Papa. In the meantime we shall proceed to the next phase. Usually, for people polluted by the outside world, this whole process takes about nineteen days, Grandfather said, though it is even better to stretch it out over thirty-three days. Since you do not have that kind of time, I have shortened it for you down to three days, but we shall manage. Come with me to another spot - I have set up a particular device there." 
We walked about a hundred metres away from the lake, and there amidst a group of trees I saw a place prepared for me to lie down, made of dried grasses. Next to this lay four ropes made of woven nettle fibres or flax. 
At one end of each rope there was a noose, while the other was tied to a tree. After I lay down, Volodya put each of my hands and feet through a noose, tugged on them a little and began tightening them with the aid of sticks placed half-way along each rope. After a little tugging, as though trying to literally quarter my body, he jerked each of my hands and feet in turn. I could feel a crunch in my joints. Then he tightened the rope even more, saying: 
"Papa, you need to lie like this for an hour on your stomach and an hour on your back. And so that it will not be boring for you and even more beneficial, I shall give you an invigorating massage. And you can just relax, or even go to sleep, if you like." 
My son and I went through this procedure two hours each day on all three days. 
As I later found out from Grandfather, this procedure served to lubricate all my joints. It is especially important for elderly people. It can even add to one's height, since it straightens out the spinal column. But the main benefit is increased lubrication of the joints. Think about it: when we walk or run or work out in the gymn to pump up our muscles, almost all exercise involves increased pressure on our joints. InVolodya's procedure, though, it is exactly the opposite: the pressure is taken off 
Each time during the stretching procedure, Volodya gave me a massage. On the second day he rubbed down my body with some sort of sweetish juice or tea, and a whole lot of insects crawled over me. I had been told earlier by Anastasia that they served to cleanse the pores of my skin.' In our own living conditions, the pores of the skin can be cleansed by 
43 
going to a Russian banya and applying, for example, a birch besom.' When a Man steams and sweats, the pores of his skin are cleansed, too. 
Interspersed with the stretching procedures we did some fairly common exercises: running, swimming, chinning ourselves on the bough of a tree (using it as one would an exercise bar). About three times a day Volodya suggested I do a handstand, head down, and hold the position for as long as I possibly could. I stood like that, my legs leaning against a tree trunk. This, too, is a rather interesting procedure: a lot of blood rushes to one's face, making it tense up and causing a smoothing of the wrinkles. 
For the whole three days we lived on cedar milk, flower pollen, cedar nut oil, berries and a small quantity of dried mushrooms (all this is available in our society). Going through all the procedures thought up by my son and reflecting on how they could be adapted to our conditions, I came to the general conclusion that all this can be done effectively back home. One can even use body-cleansing agents available in pharmacies, as well as making use of diuretic remedies and fasting. It is not difficult to obtain dead water either - all water sold in bottles today is dead water. You can get living water, too, if you have access to a pure wellspring. 
You begin to feel the healing effects of these procedures right off 
lSee Book I, Chapter 25: "Bugs". 
2banya, birch besom - see footnote 20 in Book 2, Chapter I: "Alien or man?". Besoms may be made from other types of wood as well - oak or juniper, for example. 
44 
A mysterious procedure 
But included in this set of procedures was a rather mysterious one, which would be quite a challenge to replicate under our conditions, although maybe someone will have an idea and let me know. I shall describe it in detail. Three times a day - morning, just before lunch and just after three o'clock in the afternoon (more or less) - my son gave me some tea to drink which he had prepared. 
Each time when the hour came for me to take the tea, Volodya would run off to his hiding-place and bring back a small jar of this tea, which he invited me to drink, but no more than one swallow at a time. The first time he did this, he said: 
"Take a drink of this tea, Papa, and remember how big a swallow you took. As soon as you have drunk it, lie down on the grass, and I shall listen to what is happening with your heart." 
I drank the tea and lay down on the grass. Volodya put his little hand on my chest and kept very still. Within a few moments I felt either a warming or a tingling sensation in different parts of my body. My heart began to beat furiously. It wasn't as though it had started beating any faster - I had the sensation of my heart muscles expanding normally, but contracting much more sharply than usual, forcing out the blood. 
As I was later informed by specialists, in cases of a vigorous and sharp blood flow through places where the capillary vessels are partially blocked, warming and tingling sensations can be expected. 
Volodya listened to my heart-beat for several minutes, and then said: 
"Everything is fine, Papa. Your heart can actually withstand an even larger swallow. But it is best not to take any chances. The next time take a slightly smaller swallow." 
45 
When I asked my son why he was giving me this tea and what its composition was, he replied as follows: 
"This tea, Papa, will give you a great deal of strength, and help you recover from any diseases you may have. But, most importantly; it will enable you to discover the strength and energy you will need for the birth of my sister." 
"What, d'you think I don't have enough already?" "Perhaps. But now you will have strength and energy in abundance, and in the exact balance you need." 
''Are they permanent, or will I use them up with the birth of the child?" 
"For bearing subsequent children you will need to drink this tea once more. After all, they do it this way each time." ''And just who might 'they' be?" 
"Sables and other animals. I only studied the sable's actions. It was Grandfather who advised me as to when, at what time and for how many days I needed to watch them in particular." 
''And how does Grandfather know about all that?" "Grandfather, you see, Papa, has all the knowledge of the great wise priests of yore. Even knowledge that has been forgotten by the priests of today. And even knowledge that was secret many thousands of years ago. This tea was taken by the priests before the birth of their children, also before death, so that they could remain immortal." 
"What d'you mean, 'before death, so that they could remain immortal'?" 
"Well, I mean, so that everyone would think they were dead - whereas, in fact, they only changed bodies and were reincarnated on the spot, and all their information stayed with them. There are other methods of quick reincarnation, but very few that will allow the retention of the information possessed at the time of death. That is why people can be reborn but still have to study life all over again, learn 
everything right from scratch, and they are unable to compare the present world with the past. And they get confused in their life because they include no knowledge of life and no feelings capable of sensing God." 
"But with Grandfather, all the information about the past, you're saying, has been retained?" 
"Yes, Papa. Our Grandfather is a great priest and wiseman. There is only one person living on the Earth today who significantly surpasses him in power." 
"Where is he living right now, this strongest and wisest one - do you know? You must be talking about the high priest?" 
"I am talking about our Mama Anastasia, Papa." "Anastasia? But how could she have more information and greater knowledge than your great-grandfather?" 
"Grandfather says he is hindered by too much information. 
And he can forget things. But Mama experiences no such hindrance, because there is no information contained in her." 
"What d'you mean? Which is it - does she really know more, or has she no knowledge at all?" 
"I did not express myself quite accurately; Papa. With Mama Anastasia all the information... how shall I put it? ... she has a great deal more, only it is compressed in the form of feelings. And whenever she needs to, she is able to feel in a single moment something that Grandfather might require a day or two, or even more, to think about." 
"I can't say I understand everything you've said, but it is interesting. Tell me more. What about you? Does this mean that you don't possess information about the past, seeing how you've had to consult with Grandfather?" 
"That is correct." 
"Why? You mean to say you're mentally inferior to them - Grandfather and Great-grandfather? And what do they tell you about this? Grandfather probably tells you that I'm to blame?" 
47 
"Grandfather never told me anything like that." "But what about Mama? What did she say?" 
"I asked Mama why 1 do not know as much as my forebears. And not as much as she, or even you, Papa. And this was her answer: 
'''All the truths of the Universe, son, and all the information accumulated right from its pristine origins, has always been available to every Man, nothing hidden. Not everybody is capable of understanding it and making it their own, because their life-goals and the aspirations of their souls do not correspond to those of the Universe. Man has free will in everything, and is free to choose a path other than that of the Universe. But God is free too, as to when, how and to whom He gives a hint. You must not worry about information that is lacking in you. Seek out your dream and know that the whole will be offered to you in full, if the dream that is born within you is worthy of co-creation." 
"Hmmm... So tell me, Volodya, what do you make of all that?" 
"Once my dream and life-goal are created in all their detail, all the knowledge 1 need to turn the dream into reality will be born in me all on its own, without fail." 
"But in the meantime, then, you will go on consulting with Grandfather?" 
"Yes, with Grandfather, and Mama, and you, and 1 shall try to ponder life all on my own." 
"Does that mean 1 have to consult with Grandfather about the recipe for the extraordinary tea you've been giving me these past three days?" 
"When it comes to the recipe, 1 can tell you about that mysel£" 
"Then tell me." 
"This recipe was prepared using taiga herbs. So that 1 would be able to know which herbs to choose, and in what 
correlation, for three days and nights I observed a sable - one that likewise had an aspiration to be a father. Grandfather told me that the female sable will not allow her mate to approach her if he fails to prepare himself properly And I observed what herbs he ate during those days, and at what time he chose to pick them. That, too, turned out to be important. All the herbs he ate I gathered as well, only I had to gather a larger store of them, since you, Papa, I can tell, weigh quite a bit more than a sable. 
"Once I had gathered samples of a particular kind of herb, I would put them into a vessel and grind them down with a pestle until a juice emerged. All this time I thought only good and pleasant thoughts - about you, Papa, about Mama, and about my future sister. Then I would take the paste which resulted and empty it into a clay jar. I poured water over the jar's contents and added cedar oil so that it formed a film on top. When you drank that swallow of tea, Father, and your heart started beating a bit faster, I could tell the tea had turned out wel1." 
As I listened to my son, I thought: Not many people have the opportunity to observe a sable in its natural surroundings. But perbaps tbey could keep watch on what herbs a cat or a dog eats, for example. For that it would be necessary to carry or transport these pets into a forest and follow their behaviour, and, ifpossible, identify which herbs tbey ate. 
I was most interested in the tea recipe which my son followed, since just three days' using it produced a palpable effect, while Volodya had indicated a complete therapy course ought to last either nineteen or thirty-three days. That means that after a full-term course, in combination with the other exercises, Man can really free himself from many ills, halt his body's ageing process and rejuvenate himself in some sense of the word. I want to stress that even this three-day application in practice confirms that such an effect is possible. Then 
49 
there is folk wisdom, too, to take into account, as well as the scientific basis of these procedures. 
Of course people have gone to chemists' or drug stores and seen the herbal mixtures our pharmaceutical industry has to offer for the treatment of a variety of ailments.' Many know that in Nature there are a whole lot of medicinal plants. But not everyone knows that these can only be really effective, either prophylactically or therapeutically, if they are picked on the right day and at the right time of day. 
As to preparing herbal mixtures, along with everything else must be considered the way medicinal herbs correlate with each other. As we can see, there are too many factors that need to be known in order to prepare a mixture like Volodya's. And it is highly doubtful whether any of our herbal healers today knows about all the factors involved. 
I very much wanted to take this opportunity of presenting, as a gift to my readers, a recipe for body restoration never before published anywhere in the world, and in a simpler form than Volodya's, so that it will be easily accessible to the majority of people. 
Directly my son's three-day therapy course came to an end, he informed me he would like to go to bed earlier than was his custom (it turned out that he barely managed to get two or three hours' sleep a night the past three nights), and he dozed off immediately, while I started heading back toward Anastasia's glade. 
I was fascinated by two questions. First, why did our son not possess a knowledge of the past, as did Grandfather? And secondly, was there any way of simplifying the recipe for the tea which he had prepared for me? 
3In Russia today almost all pharmacies carry a large selection of dried medicinal plants, with their healing properties clearly marked on each package. 
A vision 
Thoughts of food, however, were gradually relegated to the back burner as I began to concentrate more and more on thoughts of my future daughter. On the one hand, it wouldn't be a bad thing at all if Anastasia gave birth to a daughter as well as a son. But on the other hand, when this daughter gets older, she will either have her own Space or inherit the Space created by my son and face the same problems Volodya is having to deal with right now. Besides, who could she possibly marry, here in the taiga? 
She could go off into our world, but that wouldn't be easy either. It would mean leaving her own Space and her loyal animal friends. And I can't imagine any young man agreeing to come and live with her in the taiga. It's not all that comfortable here in the wilds for someone from the outside. And, to be honest about it, that includes me. It is interesting to talk with Anastasia - I would even say her company is alluring. When I'm with her, I feel a sense of peace and joy in my heart. But when I'm left all alone and she's not around, I feel uncomfortable, to say the least - even a bit fearful. 
The creatures treat Anastasia and our son quite differently from me. Of course they don't attack me, but whenever we meet, they still regard me with an air of suspicion. I once attempted - in Anastasia's presence - to command the squirrels to bring me some cedar cones. I made the same gestures as Anastasia, but there was no reaction from the squirrels. Another time I tried calling the she-wolf Just like Anastasia, I held out my hand to her, then clapped it against my thigh. 
Rejuvenation
But instead of running toward me, she stood rooted to the spot, and her hackles stood on end in a show of aggression. And I lost any desire to further communicate with these creatures. I realised that they could be loyal only to one specific Man in perpetuity. 
So it could turn out that some young man comes to see our daughter in the taiga and he will not feel comfortable in her Space. Volodya has not given sufficient thought to his sister's future. Turns out he feels sorry for the creatures, but apparently not for his sister. And I didn't think about it either - I absent-mindedly gave him encouragement. 
Immersed in these thoughts, I was surprised to discover that I had already arrived at Anastasia's glade. No sooner had I taken a few steps in the direction of the familiar dugout than I noticed Anastasia herself standing there, her body half-turned to me, combing her long hair with her hands. I stopped dead in my tracks: she did not look at all like the same woman I had known for the past ten years. And when she turned to face me, my legs became jelly, my heart began throbbing and I realised I could not move from the spot. 
Just ten to fifteen paces from me stood a woman who looked the picture of a fairy-tale vision. She was wearing a long, sheer, light-coloured dress down to her ankles, almost like a ball gown, gathered with a belt around her slender waist. Her head was crowned with a wreath woven of grasses and flowers, like a diadem. Her golden hair hung in wavelets around her shoulders. But that wasn't all! Her stately figure and face were so beautiful as to defy any possible description. 
I stood there, afraid to move, my gaze unblinkingly fixed on Anastasia. It seemed as though if I took my eyes away I would lose consciousness. My head began spinning, but I continued to gaze at her without blinking. I found myself digging my nails forcefully into my hand, seeking escape in pain from this extraordinary state of mind. But I hardly felt any pain at all. 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
And as this uniquely beautiful woman gradually and graciously approached me, I lost all sensation, not just of pain but of any part of my physique. She slowly came right up to me, and I recall feeling the enchanting fragrance of her body. I could sense her light breathing and... I lost consciousness. 
When I woke up I was lying on the ground. Anastasia was sitting beside me, massaging my temples and the bridge of my nose. Her diadem-wreath was gone, and her hair was brushed back and tied with a blade of grass. I felt an almost complete calm as I gazed into those tender greyish-blue eyes which had become so dear to me. And I finally came to myself upon hearing her voice: 
"What happened to you, Vladimir? Did you get overtired, or did our son somehow upset you?" 
"Our son... No, quite to the contrary, he has been giving me treatments these past three days. We went through a series of exercises." 
''And you overexerted yourselves?" 
"Volodya did. He fell asleep. By contrast, I've begun to feel very good indeed." 
"Then why did you lose consciousness? Your heart was throbbing and has still not completely calmed down." 
"Because... Oh, Anastasia, why did you dress up that way? 
Your hair's somehow different. And the way you walked as you approached me - that was unusual, too." 
"I wanted to do something nice for you, Vladimir. After all, you are more accustomed to look at women in fancy clothes. I thought you and I could take a walk together through the taiga or along the lakeshore. And here you are lying down. If you want to have a rest, let us go to the dug-out, and there you can have a nap." 
"First let's go and take a walk, as you proposed," I said as I rose to my feet. "Only you, Anastasia, walk behind me, please." 
"Why?" 
Rejuvenation 
"Because... Yes, I am more accustomed to looking at women in fancy clothes, as you say But it is better for me if you don't dress up that way; or wear your hair like that, or adorn yourselflike that." 
"You did not like the way I looked, Vladimir?" enquired Anastasia, as she trotted along behind me. 
"That's not it. I liked it very much. Only; in future, do it just one step at a time. Your hair first, for example. And then spend some time wearing it that way Then you can put on your diadem-wreath, and a day or two later the dress. Only without the belt to start with, and afterward you can put on the belt. You see, if you do everything at once, it's really hard for me to get accustomed to. It looks strange." 
"Strange? Does that mean you did not recognise me, Vladimir?" 
"I recognised you. But... It's just that I was simply overwhelmed with your beauty; Anastasia." 
''Aha, you admit it! You admit it! That means you really think I am beautiful? Eh?" 
I felt her hands resting on my shoulders, and I stopped. 
Then I closed my eyes, turned around and replied: 
"You, Anastasia, are not just beautiful. You are... " 
She pressed herself against me, putting her head on my shoulder. 
"Our son, Anastasia," I went on, in a whisper, "would like to have a little sister." 
''And I would like you and me, Vladimir, to have a daughter," Anastasia quietly responded. 
"May she have your looks, Anastasia!" ''And may our daughter be like you... " 
I shall not describe that night. Or the following morning. They are beyond description. But I shall say one thing to my men-readers: if any of you manage to see a goddess in the woman you know, your days and nights - many, many days and nights, in fact - will be divine. All the miseries of the past will vanish before them. And there will be no more storms to darken your day. I'm not talking about sentimentality here, nor about beautiful words and professions oflove. The whole point is... 
In any case, let each figure it out for themselves, if they can and wish to do so. 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Divine nutrition 
It was only several days later that I remembered I wanted to find out from Anastasia the recipe for the therapeutic tea, as well as the overall method of correct nutrition or dietetics for my readers. It's a good thing I remembered. It seems that Anastasia knew about an unusual - I might say; unique - method of nutrition which can be applied even to city living conditions. 
To my surprise, instead of giving me the tea recipe right off, Anastasia began talking about Man's capabilities, about patients and healers. We had spoken of this on several other occasions, but what she had to tell me this time was indeed interesting. 
"Reality; Vladimir, must be defined only through one's self Every Man living on the Earth today is capable of seeing into the lives of people thousands of years ago, oflooking into the future, and of creating his own future. All have this tremendous ability within themselves. It just needs to be understood. Once it is understood, then nobody can lead them away from the truth. People will come into harmony with each other, and endless warfare will cease. 
"A lot of efforts have been made to distort past reality. The possibility of distortion arises when Man abandons his own reasoning powers and forms constructs of the past based on somebody else's words and conclusions." 
"It is not entirely clear to me, Anastasia, how every Man on the Earth can arrive at a knowledge of people living in centuries past, let alone past millennia. There is a whole science, 
too, exclusively devoted to studying the history of mankind. But even today scholars argue over Man's origin and purpose. Historical events are interpreted in different ways." 
"'In different ways' - does that mean there are correct and incorrect interpretations? Or perhaps there is some distortion in the way they all describe the past? As a rule, the distortions are introduced for someone's particular benefit. But when you, all by yourself, recreate scenes of the past within yourself, you will see the truth - you will determine your purpose and place in the Universe." 
"But how, for example, would I be able to see historical scenes of thousands of years ago all on my own?" 
"You can picture them through logical thinking. And even the life of the Vedruss civilisation will appear to you." 
''And what should I think logically about?" 
''About images of people you have seen over the half-century of your life, and the changes that have taken place in them." 
"It's still not too clear to me just how I should be thinking." 
"It will become clear if you are not too lazy to think. Come, Vladimir, let us begin together, and you can continue on your own, and every Man may recreate scenes of the past, in order to integrate the very best parts into his future." 
''All right then, but you be the first to start." 
"I shall begin. Look hard and, if you can, add details - they are important. Today you see a whole lot of hospitals and pharmacies with medicines for thousands of ailments." 
"Yes, that's something everyone can see. What of it?" 
"Do you recall that just thirty years ago there were fewer of them?" 
"Yes, of course." 
''And how many were there a hundred or two hundred years ago?" 
''A lot fewer. Everybody knows that modern medical science is only a little over two hundred years old." 
"You see, your own logic has led you to a conclusion: not too long ago there were no hospitals at all. Now think, and recall: who treated people in cases of illness?" 
"Who?" 
"You yourself lived in a village and saw how your grandmother gave your father and mother herb teas to drink." 
"In that village it wasn't just my grandmother who could bring about cures - there were others too." 
''And in every human settlement there were most certainly people who gathered and preserved therapeutic herbs. And every Man could obtain help right away, whether he came down with a minor ailment or even a serious disease. And payment for help was a pittance, often just a simple 'thank you' sufficed." 
"Well, sure, they were neighbours, after all. And there were plenty of herbs to be found all around." 
"Yes, there were very many useful herbs. And many people were aware of the properties of these herbs." 
"Of course theywere. I myself knew about some of them, but now I've forgotten." 
"You see, you have forgotten. Many people have forgotten. 
What does a Man do today ifhe gets a scratch or a cut?" 
"He goes to a pharmacy, buys a bandage or a band-aid and sticks it on the wound." 
"He spends time getting to the pharmacy and spends moneywhen he is there. By contrast, in the past, every child knew that if you apply a plantain leaf directly to a wound, the wound will quickly heal and there will be no infection." 
"I know that too, but today in many places the herbs are contaminated. All around, you find noxious fumes from cars, dust, acid rain... " 
"Yes, you are right. But that is not the point. When we talk about images of the past, you could draw the conclusion 
that Man's knowledge of curing people in the past was superior to that of people today." 
"It would seem that way." 
"I hear a note of doubt or uncertainty in your voice, Vladimir. In that case the image will not appear before you. You must be absolutely certain in the force of your confidence. Or in your rejection. Continue to pursue the course oflogic." 
"You see, Anastasia, all logic, too, tells me that Man's knowledge in the area of folk medicine in the past was significantly greater than that possessed by people today. One might even say, immeasurably greater. It follows that the services effected on the basis of this knowledge were significantly more perfected than today. But somehow it is challenging to suddenly find that all our modern hospitals, pharmacies and medical institutions are completely superfluous. It simply boggles the mind! 
"When someone in the Vedruss civilisation - our ancestor came down with an ailment, he would eat a herb or drink a tea, and the ailment was gone. When someone in our civilisation takes ill, he goes to the hospital, pays a fee to be seen by a doctor, the doctor prescribes some kind of pills or shots, and the patient has to pay again for the drugs, often quite dearly so. And then in lots of cases the drugs turn out to be counterfeit. Officials from the Ministry of Health say that up to 30% of the drugs sold at our pharmacies are counterfeit. 
'And then a whole bunch of terrible new diseases keep popping up. It's as though someone deliberately erased the perfect knowledge we once had and replaced it with something less efficient or even illusory. Moreover, official medicine still today treats folk healers with a fair degree of scepticism, probably because it sees them as competition. But why do not the state and society realise that for hundreds and thousands of 
years mankind has efficiently healed itself through folk medicine, accumulating a huge amount of experience over this time, and hence this deserves to be developed and studied? And, in the final analysis, to be taught in the schools? 
"But that would mean all the businesses involved in modern medicine would collapse... incredible! Simply incredible, Anastasia! I think I'm beginning to understand: modern medicine is not as much about curing people as about running a business! And if it's business we're talking about, that means that all the companies making pills find it much more profitable when people are ill. The more sick people there are, the more income will kick in for the drug companies. By the laws of business, in such a situation the number of sick people will quickly begin to steadily increase. It's a vicious circle. I'm becoming more and more convinced that health care in the distant past was much more rational and effective than today. Only there are a few historical facts that are standing in the way of a final conclusion." 
"What kind of facts, Vladimir?" 
"Well, for instance, history has recorded epidemic outbreaks of plagues, smallpox and leprosy. Some history textbooks say that whole settlements died out. Did that really happen?" 
"Yes, it did." 
"But now, through he help of modern medicine, the plagues have been beaten, along with cholera and smallpox. For example, they inoculate everyone against smallpox and that's the end of it. That means that the folk healers of the past were defeated by these diseases, while modern medicine has succeeded." 
"That is not true, Vladimir. Take a closer look at the timeframes and put simple facts together. These epidemic outbreaks you speak of began happening at a time when folk healers were subjected to persecution. Many of them were 
even put to death. During the occult ages' they were seen as a threat to the authorities. Both then and now it was believed that pagans worshipped Nature and were unspiritual people. This is not true: pagans respected Nature as the creation of God. And they had knowledge of many of the Divine creations which people are ignorant of today." 
"That's enough, Anastasia. I no longer have any doubts. It is plain that modern medical science is a long ways from the science of folk medicine. I'm convinced of that. But why did you go to such pains to persuade me?" 
"It was not just for you. I wanted your readers, too, to be able to understand by comparing facts." 
"But what for?" 
"When one fact is proved beyond a shadow of a doubt, other indisputable conclusions will come about. They may seem incredible, but please do not be so easily amazed, Vladimir." 
"What incredible conclusions, for example?" 
"First, answer this question. Tell me how people - the majority of people - explain how mankind in ancient times possessed such colossal information about Nature." 
"What d'you mean, how? If you're talking about the prescriptions of folk medicine, it's quite clear they were passed down from generation to generation." 
"All right, that may be. But I think you will agree that for each of the thousands of prescriptions, there had to be an original author." 
''According to logic, of course, there had to be, but now it is no longer possible to trace the authorship of these prescriptions." 
"It is possible! All the knowledge of the grand creation was imparted by the Creator to each and everyone without 
'For more information on the occult ages, see Book 6, Chapter 8: 
"Occultism", 
exception. This I shall prove to you, Vladimir, and to everybody. Do not be too hasty to dismiss what I say as incredible." 
"I shall try not to. Go on." 
"People think that originally Man was many times more feeble-minded than today. But that is not true, Vladimir. People of pristine origins had Divine knowledge right from the beginning." 
"But what d'you mean, 'from the beginning', Anastasia? 
What, did God Himself write out prescriptions for a whole bunch of herbal treatments? Historians' descriptions allude to mankind gradually accumulating its knowledge over the centuries." 
"But to pursue the course oflogic to its end, that particular allusion would lead to a different conclusion." 
"What kind of conclusion?" 
"It would follow from that that Man is not the perfect creation of God but the most underdeveloped of all creatures that ever lived on the Earth!" 
"How does that follow?" 
"Think about it. Your dog knows what herbs she needs to eat when she comes down with an ailment. And a cat will know to run to the forest to find a herb she requires. But nobody wrote them a prescription. A bee knows all about extracting nectar from a flower, building a honeycomb and storing honey in it, and gathering pollen. And what raising the next generation is all about. If one link in the chain of know ledge the bee family is endowed with should be removed, the whole family would die out. 
"But bees continue to exist today. And that can only mean one thing: the Creator has given them all the knowledge they need right from the start, right at the moment of their creation. And that is why the bees have not died out, but have lived for millions of years, and are still building their unique 
honeycombs even today, just as in the first moment of their creation. And the ants, too, continue to build their homes. And flowers continue to unfold their petals with the advance of each new dawn, just as on the first day of their creation. And the apple, pear and cherry trees know exactly what kind of juices they need from the ground to grow their fruit. All information is given to them right at their inception, right at the moment of their creation. And Man is no exception." 
"Yes... Incredible. All logic really does lead to that conclusion. And that means... Hold on - just where is all this knowledge right now?" 
"It is preserved in every single Man. And the therapeutic recipe for the healing herbal tea is one that every Man is free to compile for himself" 
"But how?" 
"You see, Vladimir, God gave it to Man right from the beginning. It is capable of curing a great many diseases of the flesh and prolonging life. It is extremely simple, and at the same time not so simple. Man should be able to figure it out with his mind. Let me start with some pre-history." 
In the Vedruss civilisation everybody lived to be more than a hundred years old. And they knew no diseases of the flesh. They nourished themselves according to God's prescription. Not arbitrarily and not haphazardly but with the greatest thoughtfulness the Creator specially arranged it so that the herbs, vegetables, berries and fruits did not ripen all at once, but one after the other in a strict sequence. 
One ripened in the early spring, others over the summer, or later in the autumn. Their ripening time was determined by the moment when the specific fruit, vegetable or herb could offer the greatest benefit to Man. A Man living on his own domain, feeding himself as God prescribed, could not take ill. The type of food and the time of taking it had been determined for Man by God. Man himself decided the quantity of food, but not through reason - he ate as much as he liked. And his body could accurately determine, down to the gram, the required quantity of food. 
In the autumn each family put up stores for the winter: berries, root vegetables, herbs, nuts and mushrooms. Over the winter, in every household a plate stood on the table, with little piles of produce from the summer harvest. All the members of the family were involved in their own activities, but whenever they felt hungry or thirsty, they would go over to the table and take what they needed without thinking about it. Note, Vladimir: they took what they needed without thinking. Their bodies knew exactly what kind of food was needed and in what quantity - everyone had been endowed with this ability by God. This ability can be revived now. All that is needed is information. 
I have adapted the Vedruss method of nutrition for people of today. Try it yourself, and encourage others to try it. It goes as follows. 
A Man living in a modem apartment needs to acquire a small quantity - a hundred or two hundred grams each of all the vegetables, fruits and edible herbs growing in the region where he lives. 
Before using any of this produce he should go a whole day without eating, drinking only spring water, and having a glass of red beet juice for lunch. After drinking the beet juice it is better not to leave his home. The stomach 
and bowels will start undergoing an intensive cleansing process. 
Upon awakening the following morning and feeling hungry, he should be able to take any vegetable, herb or piece of fruit and put it on a small plate. After sitting down at the table, he should carefully observe what is lying on the plate, sniff it, lick it and then eat it with an unhurried chewing. It is best to be alone in the room during this time, isolated from the sounds of the artificial world. 
The feeling of hunger may not disappear after eating a single piece of food, or it may reappear after a short period of time. In that case he should select a second piece and eat it in the same manner as the first. 
Man should take all the produce he has obtained and sample them in any sequence at short intervals. 
The time for sampling any particular food is determined by the sensation of hunger. 
The taking of food should definitely begin in the morning. 
By the end of this day a Man should have sampled all locally grown produce. If there is a large variety available and one day is insufficient, the sampling can extend to the following day. 
This procedure is extremely important. It will give many people's bodies, perhaps for the first time in their lives, a chance to become acquainted with the taste qualities and properties of the local produce, and to determine how needful it is to Man at a given moment and in what quantity. 
Once the body has become familiar with all the produce, one should cut each vegetable into small pieces and lay them out on a large plate. Small clumps of greens and berries should also be put out, either alongside or on another plate. Any produce that will quickly spoil on the plate should be immersed in spring water. 
Also on the table one should put honey, flower pollen, cedar oil and springwater. Man may go about his own daily affairs, but when he feels hungry he can go over to the table and pick up an item he likes (either with his hands or with a wooden spoon) and eat it. 
It is possible some of the food may be eaten up completely, while the rest may be left untouched. This means that your personal wise physician and nutritionist - your body which was given to you by the Creator - selected for you what you needed at that moment, while what you did not need was left untouched. 
The uneaten produce need not be put again on the table the following day. But after three days a complete variety should once again be displayed. It is possible that one's body will need something different by then. 
In time Man will be able to determine which items can be temporarily excluded from his diet, so as not to waste his efforts in obtaining them. But it is possible that after a period of time his body will indeed have need of them again, and so from time to time one should layout on the table as wide a variety as possible.
I know that people living in your world often need to be away from their dwellings, but even here one can adapt. For example, one can make or acquire a small birch-bark container, in which to put a portion of the food from the table. One's body will choose what is most required. 
In case of an extended trip, one's body needs to become familiar with the produce available in the new territory, since, in spite of identical names, there may be significant taste differences. 
In this method of nutrition, Vladimir, it is important to grasp one essential point: it is not only the animals that are able to determine which kinds of food will be most beneficial to their bodies at a given moment and in what 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
quantity. This knowledge is present, too, within every single Man. 
Our son thought up everything correctly: to prepare the healing tea for you from taiga herbs, he decided to observe a sable. But if you yourself knew the taste of every herb, your body would be able to determine and select the herbs you need far more accurately than the sable. 
When you get back to your apartment, allow your body to get to know the taste of all easily available produce. Do not mi." the food together or add salt, otherwise your body will not be able to determine the value and significance of the produce. 
This method by which any Man can compile his own dietary regime or recipe for healthful nutrition seemed to me to be most original and logical. The body's needs - in terms of quantity and variety of produce - will naturally differ from one individual to the next. Consequently; there cannot be a single recipe or dietary regime which is the same for all. But through the aid of the method proposed by Anastasia, every Man can make up his own individual regime, which will be as accurate and useful as possible for him. 
It appears as though man-made recipes and prescriptions are not always beneficial to one's health. Instead, they tend to be technology-based and more convenient for the manufacturers and organisers of our modern nutrition industry. Take McDonald's, for example - one of the most powerful and influential corporations, known around the globe - 
Divine nutrition 
inculcating in the whole world a taste for uniform hamburgers and cheeseburgers along with packages of fried potatoes, roping in everybody under a single unitary norm. Such a system undoubtedly works very well to the manufacturer's advantage - uniform products, uniform equipment and preparation technology. How far removed such uniformity is from the natural method of nutrition, and how harmful! 
More and more people all over the planet are becoming aware of this. Wednesday; 16 October 2002 (the UN's World Food Day),' became the annual official day of protest against McDonald's - a protest against the promotion of junk products under the guise of food, the use of aggressive child-oriented advertising campaigns, the cruel exploitation of workers, unethical treatment of animals, destruction of the environment and the world dominance oflarge corporations over our lives. 
More and more, McDonald's is being held up by a worldwide circle of protesters as a symbol of contemporary capitalism. One after another, all across the globe lawsuits are being brought against American corporations dealing in 'junk food' - McDonald's, Kentucky Fried Chicken, Burger King and Wendy'S on behalf of millions of consumers led astray by the systematic and unethical promotion of harmful food products. These people have consequently suffered from obesity; heart ailments and a variety of other serious health 
21f!Orid Food DClY (also known as Wlorld Nutrition Day) - established in I979 by the member countries of the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) to raise awareness of world poverty and hunger and to commemorate the founding of the FAO on I6 October I945 in the city of Quebec (Canada). A specific theme is selected for each year's celebration. The Worldwide Anti-McDonald's protest is an independent movement which chose their annual protest day to coincide with World Food Day. According to their literature, the Worldwide Anti-McDonald's Day has been marked since I985. 
problems. Concern over this health threat is growing everywhere in Europe and the USA, exacerbated by mad cow disease and the use of genetically modified feed, as well as direct consumption of genetically modified produce (e.g., potatoes and corn) and their traces in other products (chocolate, pastry etc.). 
But is it only our nutritional system that is constructed with some body's particular profit motive in mind? What about our contemporary governmental institutions? 
Take, for example, our modern democratic society - how ideally suited is it to human life? I was most interested to hear what Anastasia would have to say about this. 
"Tell me, Anastasia, if someone could construct a nutritional system for their own advantage at the expense of millions of people, I wonder whether our social order might have been deliberately set up with a similar motive." 
"Indeed it has. Think about it, Vladimir: ages pass, and the names of your societal structures change, but their raison d'etre remains the same - the exploitation of people." 
"Well, it hasn't always been the same. For example, we used to have slavery; and now we have democracy. I think, under democracy there is far less exploitation than when we had slavery." 
"Vladimir, would you like me to show you a scene from the past and tell you a parable?" 
"I would." 
"Then look and see." 
CHAPTER SIX 
Demon Cratius 
The slaves walked slowly in single file, everyone of them carrying a polished stone. Four lines of them, each line stretching a kilometre and a halflong, from the stone quarries to the site where construction on the walled city had begun, under the watchful eyes of armed guards - one military guard for every ten slaves. I 
Off to one side, on the pinnacle of a thirteen-metre-high 'mountain' crafted out of polished stones, sat Cratius, one of the high priests. For the past four months he had been silently observing the construction activity. Nobody distracted him, not a single person dared interrupt his contemplation, even with a sideways glance. 
Both slaves and guards accepted this artificial mountain with its throne on top as a fixed feature of the landscape. And nobody paid attention to the figure either sitting motionless on the throne or walking to and fro around the lookout platform atop the 'mountain'. Cratius had set himself the task of restructuring the state, consolidating the power of the priests for a millennium, subjugating to them all the people of the Earth, turning all without exception (including national rulers) into slaves of the priests. 
I Anastasia's narrative is told in the first part of this chapter without quotation-marks. 
One day Cratius came down from his throne, leaving a double in his place. The priest changed his clothes and took off his wig. He gave orders to the captain of the guard to have him bound in chains like a simple slave and placed in the line behind a strong young slave named Nard. 
Looking into the faces of the various slaves, Cratius had noticed that this young man in particular had a penetrating and purposeful look, not a wandering or detached gaze as did many of the others. Nard's countenance alternated between excitement and intense contemplation. That means he's hatching some kind of plan, the priest realised, but he wanted confirmation of the accuracy of this observation. 
For two days running Cratius followed Nard's every move, silently hauling the stones, sitting beside him at mealtimes and sleeping next to him in the barracks. On the third night, directly the Sleep! command had been given, Cratius turned to the young slave and in a tone of bitterness and despair whispered to no one in particular: 
"Will this situation keep up the rest of our lives?" 
The priest watched as the young slave gave a shudder, and suddenly turned to face him. His eyes were sparkling, which was noticeable even in the dim torchlight of the cavernous barracks. 
"It won't last much longer," the young slave whispered back. "I've been working out a plan. And you, old fellow; can be part of it!" 
"What sort of plan?" the priest asked with a sigh of indifference. 
Nard began to explain with an air of confidence and enthusiasm: 
"You see, old man, soon you and I and all of us will be free men instead of slaves. Figure it out for yourself: there's just one guard for every ten of us. And one guard, too, for every 
fifteen women slaves who do the cooking and sewing. When the time comes, if we all fall upon the guards at once, we can overpower them. It makes no difference that the guards are armed and we're in chains. We outnumber them ten to one, and our chains can also be used as weapons, to shield us from the blows of their swords. We'll disarm all the guards, tie them up and seize their weapons." 
"Hold on there, young man," Cratius sighed again, and added with feigned indifference: "Your plan isn't completely thought through. Sure you can disarm the guards watching over us, but it won't be long before the ruler sends in replacements - a whole army, maybe - and he'll have the insurgents killed." 
"I've thought of that, too, old man. We'll have to choose a time when the army's not around. And that time is coming. We've all noticed how the army's preparing for a campaign. They're getting provisions ready for a three-month trek. That means that in three months the army will arrive at its destination and engage the enemy in combat. It will be weakened in battle, but it will be victorious, and bring back many new slaves. They're already building new barracks to house them. We have to start disarming the guards just as soon as our ruler's army goes into battle. The couriers will need at least a month to go call it home, and it will take at least three months after that for the weakened army to return. By the time the four months are up we'll be ready to meet them. We'll have at least as many fighters as there are in the army. The slaves they seize will want to join us when they see what's happened. I've thought it all out in advance, old man." 
"I see, young fellow; with your plan you can disarm the guards and overpower the army," the priest answered, already sounding more cheerful, and then added: "But what will become of the slaves after that, and what will happen with the rulers, the guards and the soldiers?" 
"I haven't given too much thought to that. Only one thing comes to mind, though: whoever was a slave in the past will become a free man. Whoever's not a slave today will be a slave tomorrow," replied Nard with some hesitation, as though thinking aloud. 
"But what about the priests? Tell me, young man, after your victory, will they be slaves or not?" 
"The priests? Haven't thought about that either. But now I'm thinking: the priests can stay where they are. The slaves and rulers listen to them. Sometimes they're hard to understand, but I get the feeling they're harmless. Let them keep on telling their stories about the gods, but we know best how to live our lives and have a good time." 
"Have a good time - that's great," responded the priest, and pretended he couldn't wait to get to sleep. 
But there was no sleep for Cratius that night. Only contemplation. Sure, he thought, the simplest course of action would be to report this to the ruler, and have them seize this young slave - bes clearly the chief instigator. But that won't solve the problem. The slaves will always have the desire to be freed from bondage. New leaders will emerge, new plans will be batcbed, and as long as that goes OlZ, tbe main threat to tbe state will always be from toitbin. 
Cratius was faced with the challenge of working out a plan to enslave the whole world. He realised there was no way he could attain his goal through physical compulsion alone. What he needed to do was exert a psychological influence on every single individual, on whole nations of people. He had to bring about the thought of every single human being to the notion that slavery is the bighest bliss. He had to launch a self-developing programme to disorient whole nations in space, time and ideas - especially in their literal perception of reality. 
Cratius' thought was working faster and faster, he was no longer conscious of his body, or the heavy chains on his arms and legs. And all of a sudden, like a bolt of lightning, a 
programme came to his thought. Even though all the details were still to be worked out, and he could not yet explain it to anyone else, he could already feel it within, exploding off the scale. Cratius was now feeling himself to be the omnipotent ruler of the world. 
Lying on his bunk in chains, he was full of self-exultation: 
Tomorrow morning, when they're escorting us all to work, I'll give the secret signal and have the guards captain take me out of the line and remove the chains. I'll finalise my programme, say a few words and the world will start to change. Incredible! Just a few words, and the whole world will be subject to me, to my thoughts. God really has given to Man a power unequalled in the Universe - the power of human thought. It brings forth words which can change tbe course of history. 
The situation's turned out very well indeed. The slaves have prepared their plan of insurrection. It's logical, tbis plan, and is clearly capable of leading to an interim result very favourable to them. But with just a few words I shall ensure that not only they, but their future descendants, and the rulers of the Eartb too, will be slaves for millennia to come. 
In the morning, on Cratius' signal, the captain of the guard freed him from his chains. And the very next day the five other priests, along with the pharaoh, were invited to his observation platform. Cratius began his speech before the gathering as follows: 
"What you are about to hear must not be noted down or passed along by any of you. There are no walls around us, and my words will be heard by no one but you. I have thought up a way of turning all people living on the Earth into slaves of our pharaoh. That is not something one can do even with the aid ofvast numbers of troops and exhausting wars. But I shall accomplish it with a few simple sentences. All I need do is utter them and just two days later you will see how the world has begun to change. 
"Take a look down there and you will see long lines of slaves in chains, each slave carrying a stone. They are guarded by a host of soldiers. The more slaves there are, the better for the state - or so we always thought. But the more slaves there are, the more we have to be afraid of their rebelling. So we increase the size of our guard. 
"We are obliged to feed our slaves well, otherwise they will not be able to perform their heavy manual labour. But still they are lazy and inclined to rebellion. See how slowly they move, and the guards have become lazy and do not bother using their whips to beat even the strongest and healthiest slaves. But they will soon be moving much more quickly: 
They won't need any guards. The guards themselves will be turned into slaves. This can be effected in the following way: 
"Before sunset today heralds will be sent out everywhere to proclaim the pharaoh's decree: With the dawn of the new day all slaves will be granted complete freedom. For each stone brought to the city, the free men will receive one coin. The coins may be exchanged for food, clothing, housing, a palace in town, or even a whole town. From here on in, you are free people." 
After the priests had let Cratius' words sink in, one of them, the eldest, said: 
"You are a demon, Cratius! The demonry resulting from your plan will cover most of the nations of the world." 
"So, I may indeed be a demon, and what I have thought up, people in the future may call democracy:" 
At sunset the decree was proclaimed to the slaves. Theywere astounded. Many of them could not sleep at night, thinking about the new and happy life that lay ahead of them. 
The next morning the priests and the pharaoh once again climbed up to the lookout platform atop the artificial mountain. They could not believe the scene unfolding before their eyes. Thousands of former slaves chasing one after the other, hauling the same stones as before. Dripping with sweat, many of them were carrying two stones apiece. Others with only one stone in their hands, were literally running, kicking up the dust as they ran. Some of the guards were also hauling stones. These people, who now considered themselves free - after all, they were no longer in chains - strove to obtain as many of the sought-after coins as they could, so that they could build a happy life for themselves. 
Cratius remained at his post on the platform for several months after that, continuing to observe with satisfaction what was going on below. The transformation was colossal. Some of the slaves had organised themselves into groups and built themselves carts. Then they piled stones on top of the carts, and pushed them along, their skin covered in sweat. 
They will invent many more devices, Cratius thought to himself with satisfaction. Internal services have already started - food and water delivery. Some slaves have been eating right on the go, not wanting to waste time going back to the barracks for a meal, and payingfor the food delivery with the coins they've earned. Wow! They've also got doctors going around, offering help to people with physical needs right on the spot - also for coins. And they've appointed themselves traffic regulators. Soon they'll be choosing their own rulers and judges. Let them choose: after all, they consider themselves free now, whereas nothing has really changed - they're still hauling the same stones as before ... 
And so they have been running, down through the millennia right up to the present day, through the dust, sweating to carry the heavy stones. And today the descendants of those slaves still keep up their senseless running. 
"You're probably thinking of ordinary working people, Anastasia?" I observed. "Sure, anybody could agree with that. But you can't apply the term slaves to heads of corporations, or government officials, or entrepreneurs." 
"Do you see a difference, Vladimir? If so, tell me what it is." 
"On the one hand you've got people labouring and hauling stones like slaves. The others are in cbarge of the hauling - or, in to day's terms, managing the operation." 
"But managing, after all, is still work, and often more complex work than slaves hauling stones." 
"Well, in a sense you're right: entrepreneurs have a bit more thinking to do. Their thought is occupied with their work from morning 'til night. So, does that mean that the pharaohs, the presidents and chancellors are slaves, too?" 
"Yes, that is correct. Even the priests have become slaves, the ones who dreamt up this whole fateful scheme." 
"But if there are slaves, there must also be slave-owners. 
Who are they, if you aren't including even the priests in this category?" 
"The slave-owner is the artificial world people have been creating themselves. And the guards sit within most people's minds or bodies, whipping them and making them earn coins." 
"It's a sad scene indeed," I observed, "and it looks as though there's no way out. Over the past thousands of years empires have come and gone, religions and laws have changed, but in fact nothing has really changed: just as Man was a slave before, he remains one now. Tell me, is there anyway this situation can be corrected?" 
"There is." 
"How? And who can do it?" "The image." 
"What d'you mean, image? What kind of image?" 
"The image that offers people a different situation. Judge for yourself, Vladimir: people who control the world today through money believe that only power and money can bring happiness to Man. And all the people out there striving to earn a few coins have convinced them that they are right. But often - very often, in fact - the winners in this senseless rat-race are the ones who suffer the most. They reach illusory heights and feel, more acutely than others, the whole senselessness of their life. I shall show you a scene from the future go ahead and describe it. Let it be played out in real life." 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
The billionaire 
The billionaire John Heitzman was dying on the forty-second storey of his office tower. The whole floor had been converted into his personal apartment. Two bedrooms, a work-out gymn, a swimming pool, a dining room and two studies had comprised his refuge for the past three years. During this time he had not left his apartment even once. Not once had he taken the express lift down to where the core of his financial and industrial empire was in full operation. Not once had he gone up to the roof, where his personal helicopter was on standby; replete with a full crew awaiting his command. 
Three times a week John Heitzman retreated to one of his studies to receive four of his closest associates. At these brief sessions, which lasted no more than forty minutes, he listened to their reports with some indifference, and occasionally issued brief instructions. The billionaire's orders were never a subject for discussion - theywere simply carried out swiftly and to the letter. The book value of the empire under his exclusive control kept increasing by an average 16.5% annually. Even over the past six months, when Heitzman ceased convening even his tri-weekly sessions altogether, the ledgers showed no decline in profits. The system he had created continued to run smoothly with no glitches. 
Nobody knew the billionaire's true financial worth. His name was hardly ever mentioned in the press. Heitzman held strictly to the rule: kIoney hates trouble. 
As a young man he had been admonished by his father along these lines: 
"Let those upstart politicians strut their stuff on the TV screens and in the pages of the press. Let the presidents and governors spout their addresses to the people, assuring them all's well. Let the billionaires in the public eye go gallivanting about the country with their fancy cars and bodyguards. That is not a course, my dear John, you yourself should follow. You should always remain in the shadows and use your power, the power of money, to control governments and presidents, the wealthy and the poor, in a variety of different countries. But they must never guess who is controlling them. 
"The plan is simple in the extreme. I was the one who created the Monetary Fund, which lists the names of many different investors. In actual fact seventy percent of the fund's capital has been invested by me under different names. On the surface, as far as the dimwit masses are concerned, the fund was created for the support of developing countries. In actual fact I created it as a device for collecting 'tributemoney' from all the countries involved. 
"Here's an example. Let's sayan armed conflict breaks out between two sides. One of them (more often, both) needs money. Let them have it - it will be repaid with interest. Or some country is experiencing a social upheaval and, again, money is required. Let them have it - it will be repaid with interest. Or two political forces come into conflict; one of them will get money through our agents, and once again it will be repaid with interest. Russia alone pays us an annual sum of three billion dollars." 
At age twenty,John Heitzman had especially enjoyed these discussions with his father. Despite his earlier severity and reticence to talk, one day the father summoned John to his office and invited him to make himself comfortable in a soft armchair by the fireplace, while he himself poured a cup of his son's favourite coffee with cream and asked with a spark of genuine interest: 
"How are your college studies going, John?" 
"They're not always that interesting, Dad. I get the feeling the professors aren't too good at giving a clear and comprehensible explanation of the laws of economics." 
"Good. An apt assessment. But more precisely: professors today can't explain the laws of economics because they haven't the faintest idea of them themselves. They think economics is the domain of economists. But it isn't. World economics is under the control of psychologists, philosophers and highstakes players. 
"When I was twenty; my father your granddad, John - let me into the secrets of the management process. Now that you're twenty; I think you're worthy of inheriting this knowledge." 
"Thanks, Dad," replied John. Thus began, in these fireside chats, lessons in the laws of economics one never hears about at university. The father taught his son using his own unique method. The whole educational process was conducted in these heart-to-heart conversations, on a good-natured tone, with examples and elements of play. The information the senior Heitzman revealed to his son was astounding. There was no way one could obtain it anywhere else, even in the most prestigious universities in the world. 
"Tell me, John," asked the father, "do you know how many wealthy people there are in our country? Or in the world?" 
"Their names are listed in business journals in order of their estate-value," replied John calmly. 
"And where do we rank in these lists?" 
This was the first time Father had used we instead of 1. 
That meant he already considered him, John, a full partner. While he did not want to offend his father,John replied: 
"Your name, Father, isn't included in these lists." 
"Yes, you're right. I'm not there. Even though just our annual profit alone amounts to more than the whole estates of 
many included in the lists. And my name isn't there because one's wallet should not be transparent. Many of these people work either directly or indirectly for our empire - for yours and mine, son." 
"Dad, you must be a genius at economics. I can't even imagine how you can make such a huge empire pay us 'tribute-money' every year without military intervention. You've managed to set up such a tremendous economic operation!" 
The senior Heitzman took a pair of fire tongs and gave a poke to the logs in the hearth. Then, without a word, he poured two glasses of light wine for his son and himself It was only after his first wee sip that he finished explaining: 
"You know, I didn't set up any operation at all. The capital under my control simply allows me to give orders, and others carry them out. Many analysts and government experts in various countries, even their presidents, would be astonished to learn that the current situation in their countries is not determined by their own actions, but rather by my will. 
"Political technology centres, economics institutes, analytical think tanks and government agencies in many countries - none of them are aware that they're working along strict guidelines laid down by my departments. And I don't have all that many employees. For example, all of Russia's socio-economic policy and its military doctrine are determined and controlled by one department comprising four psychologists. Each psychologist has four secretaries. Not one of them knows about the activities of the others. 
"I'll tell you how the control system works - it's really quite simple. But first,]ohn, you should understand the true laws of economics - which you'll never get from any college professor. Professors don't even know they exist. Here's a law: in the conditions of a democratic society, presidents, governments, banks, as well as major and minor entrepreneurs in all countries work for a single entrepreneur, who 
stands at the top of the economic pyramid. They worked for my father, now they're working for me, and soon they'll be working exclusively for you." 
John Heitzman looked at his father and could scarcely take it all in. Certainly, he knew that his father was rich. But here they were talking about much more than riches - they were talking about supreme power, which was now going to be passed by inheritance to him, John. All this incredible information still had not sunk in completely. How could it be that, in a free and democratic society, everyone from presidents on down to the hundreds of thousands of firms, both major and minor - supposedly all separate legal entities were in fact working for just one man, namely, his father? 
"When I first heard from your granddad what I have just now shared with you, I had a hard time figuring it all out. Right now,John, you're probably in the same boat ... 
"But let me make one thing perfectly clear," the elder Heitzman went on. "There are wealthy people in this world. But for every wealthy person there is someone even wealthier. And there is one who is the wealthiest of all. All the other wealthy people - and, consequently, all the people under their control - work for him, the one who is the wealthiest of all. This is the law of the system under which we live. 
''All this talk of unselfish aid to developing countries is nothing but a bluff Sure, wealthy countries grant credit to developing countries through international funds, but in fact they do this simply to get back a healthy amount of interest in return for using their credit - in other words, to collect 'tribute-money'. 
"Russia, for example, pays three billion dollars a year to the IMF, and this amount only represents the interest on the credit allotted to Russia. Many economists are aware that the basic financing for the IMF is provided by American capital. They realise that the extortionate interest rates on credit use 
is siphoned off to the USA. But who they go to specifically, nobody knows. America as a country is simply a convenient shield in the capital game. And it is dependent on capital more than any other nation. Tell me,John, did you know that America has a national debt?" 
"Yes, Dad, I know. It's an astronomical figure. Just last year it amounted to ... And servicing the debt cost ... " 
"So, that means you realise that a country which loans to 
other countries at the same time takes out huge loans itself?" 
"Through its own Federal Reserve?" 
''And who does it belong to - this Federal Reserve?" "It ... It..." 
John had never thought about whom America was in debt to, but as he tried to answer his father's question it suddenly dawned on him: in the United States of America every taxpayer pays into the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve of the USA is a private bank. And, consequently, all America is paying hundreds of billions of dollars to private individuals ... or, to a single individual. 
John Heitzman had never been flustered in his life. He led, as they say, a 'healthy lifestyle'. He did not drink or smoke, he maintained a healthful diet, and worked out every day in his private gymnasium. Only in the past six months he had stopped going to the gymn. He had spent these six months lying in bed in one of his spacious bedrooms, crammed full with state-of-the-art medical equipment. Doctors maintained oncall shifts around the clock in the next room.
ButJohn Heitzman did not trust modern medical science. 
He felt no need of even talking with his doctors. There was one professor of psychology, however, that he occasionally deigned to favour with brief answers. Heitzman did not even care to know his doctors' names, including the name of this professor, though he did make a note to himself that he was the most sincere and honest of the lot. The professor talked a good deal, but what he said often included not just medical assertions but also reasonings and a desire to determine the causes of a disease. 
One day he came in all excited and announced right at the doorway: 
"I spent all last night and all this morning thinking about your condition. I think I've discovered the cause of your illness! That means that once we've removed the cause, we can talk about a pretty quick recovery... Oh, sorry, Mr Heitzman - I forgot to say hello. Good afternoon, Mr Heitzman. I got a bit carried away with my ideas." 
The billionaire did not answer the professor's greeting, or even turn in his direction, but that was how he treated all his doctors. And sometimes he would make a gesture to a doctor who had just entered the room - just a slight movement with his hand, which they all knew meant: Go away. 
Not perceiving any such gesture this time, the professor kept on explaining excitedly as follows: 
"I do not agree with my colleagues on the need to transplant your liver, kidneys and heart. Granted, these organs of yours aren't functioning up to par at the moment. No sir! Not up to par! That's a fact. But neither will transplanted organs. The reason they're not up to par lies in your extreme depression. Yes sir, in your depression. I've gone over your medical history quite a few times now. And I think I've made a major discovery. Your attending physician - he's a really great guy - he wrote down everything in detail. Every single 
The billionaire 
time he noted your mental condition. Your internal organs would always start to fail the moment you got into a depressive state. Yes sir! Quite a state... 
"Now here comes the $64, 000 question: is the failure of your internal organs causing the depression? Or the other way around: is the depression causing organ failure throughout your body? I'm absolutely convinced that the depression is the original cause. Yes sir! It's your extreme depression. It's a condition where someone ceases to strive for any goal, he loses interest in what's going on around him, he doesn't see any sense in living. And then the brain begins to transmit only half-hearted commands to the whole body! And I mean the whole of it! The stronger the depression, the weaker the commands. At a certain level the brain may cease giving these commands altogether, and then comes death. 
"So, the ultimate cause is depression, and as for eliminating it entirely, well, that's something modern medicine has no answer for. So I turned to folk medicine. And now I'm convinced that your extreme depression is the result of a curse. Yes sir! More specifically, someone's put a spell on you, and I'm prepared to back that up with quite a number of facts." 
The billionaire was about to make his Go away! gesture. He disliked all such esoteric healers - people who promised to exorcise demons and take away spells or set a defence against them - people he considered petty operators or swindlers. No doubt the professor was on the rebound from the ineffectiveness of modern medicine, he thought, and so had fallen to the level of these so-called (healers'. But the billionaire did not manage to execute the gesture. The professor headed him off, with words evoking just a smidgen of interest, but interesting all the same. 
"I have the feeling you're getting ready to send me away. 
Maybe for good. I ask you... No, I beg you, give me just five or six more minutes. It's very possible that once you've understood what I have to say, you'll make a full recovery, and 
BOOK 8: THE NEW CIVILISATION 
I'll make an important discovery. Rather, I've already made it - I just need to have it confirmed once and for all." 
The billionaire did not make his Go away! gesture. 
For three whole seconds the professor stared at Heitzman's motionless hand and realised he could continue, which he did at a rapid-fire pace: 
"People look at each other differently. Sometimes with indifference, other times with love, or hate, or envy, or fear, or respect. But it's not the outward expression of the eyes that is the main factor here. The outward appearance can be just an ordinary mask, like the faux smile of a waiter or a salesman. What's important are the true attitudes, the true feelings one person harbours towards another. The more positive emotions people express towards a particular individual, the more positive energy is concentrated in him. On the other hand, if negative emotions predominate in the atmosphere surrounding a person, he will experience an accumulation of negative and destructive energy. 
"Among the common folk this is called a spell, and folk-healers base their actions on this phenomenon. By no means all folk-healers are charlatans. The whole point is that a person who has been the target of too much negative energy from those around him is himself capable of neutralising it or, in other words, compensating for it. By telling the patient that he has removed the spell by certain types of actions, the healer helps him believe that he is cleansed. If the patient believes the healer, he is really evening out the balance within himself between the positive and the negative. If he doesn't believe, it won't happen. You don't believe in folk-healers and, consequently; they won't be of any help to you. 
"But that isn't to say that you don't have an excess of negative energy which is destructive to your mind and body. Why negative? Precisely because a man in your position can only be looked upon by people around you with resentment, and 
I don't mean just a bit of harmless envy. They might look at you - or, more specifically, treat you - with hatred. People you've fired or haven't given a raise to. A lot of people feel your power and react with fear. You see, all that amounts to negative energy. To counteract it you need positive energy. This can be supplied by family members or relatives, but your wives have run out on you, you don't have any children or friends, and you don't communicate with your relatives. You have no sources of positive energy around you. 
"Now an individual human being is capable of producing positive energy - and in sufficient quantity - within himself, all on his own. But for this he needs to set his heart on some kind of dream or goal, and the step-by-step realisation of this goal will bring about positive emotions. You've already achieved so much in life that now, it seems, you don't have any more goals or dreams left. 
"But it's extremely important to have such a goal and to strive to attain it. I have analysed the physical and mental health of different types of business people. Someone who likes mixing dough and bakes pies and sells them is happy that he can now afford to buy something he needs, and dreams of developing his business. After all, it's only with development that he receives many of the goods and services civilisation has to offer. 
"A bank manager or the owner of a profit-making concern likewise strives to develop his business, strives for increased profits, but often with less enthusiasm than someone who makes or sells pies. It's paradoxical, but true - the enthusiasm just isn't as great. It isn't as great because he's got significantly fewer tempting benefits ahead of him than the pie salesman. For him the achievements of civilisation have no special value, they're just routine. 
"If someone with a relatively modest income suddenly has the chance to buy a car, the purchase of the car will evoke in him a tremendous feeling of satisfaction or even ecstasy, 
while someone who is relatively well-off won't get any thrill from a brand new car. To him it's a mere trifle. Paradoxical, but true: rich people have fewer occasions for delight than those less well-off 
"There's one other factor that can bring satisfaction - beating one's competition. But you, Mr Heitzman, it seems, have no competition at all. 
"So it turns out you have only negative energy acting upon you, and there's a great deal of it out there. Oh, and I forgot to mention: there's just one force that can conquer the masses of negative energy - just one, but it's powerful, incredibly powerful - it's called tbe energy of love. It's when you find yourself in a state of love and someone loves you. Unfortunately, in your case, however, you don't have any women in your life. In fact, it looks like you don't really have any interest in them at all, and at your age and in your condition you're not likely to have any more interest in women. 
"There's a lot of evidence to back up my conclusion. I've compared the longevitystats of rich people, prominent politicians and presidents over the past hundred years. The results are quite persuasive. Longevity for the world's power brokers doesn't look all that great by comparison with the common folk - in fact, most often it's less. 
"Paradoxical, but true: facts are facts. Presidents and millionaires, in spite of being under constant medical care, in spite of having access to the state-of-the-art technical help and medicines and to only the highest-quality foodstuffs, are getting sick and dying just like anyone else. All this is eloquent testimony to the fact that surrounding negative energy exerts a colossal influence, and no medical science, even the very latest, is able to counteract it. 
"So, what's the bottom line? A dead-end situation? There is a way out - it may be small, it may be only one of its kind, but it's there! Yes sir! It's there. Memories! 
"My dear Mr Heitzman, please, try to remember the different stages of your life. Any memory that will bring back pleasant feelings. 
"Most importantly; if there's anyone you've given a serious promise to and not carried it out, see if there's any way you can carry it out now. I ask you, for your own sake, for the sake of science, to take at least two or three days and try to remember the good moments in your life. We've got equipment to monitor the functioning of many of your body organs. The monitoring goes on minute by minute. If you do what I'm recommending, and if these instruments start indicating positive results, there's indeed a chance we'll be able to see you through to a full recovery. Yes sir! You'll make it! I'll certainly find a way. Or maybe you'll find it on your own. Or maybe it'll just come about all by itself... Your life will come across it on its own." 
The professor fell silent and once again fixed his gaze on the hand of his patient, lying motionless before him. A few seconds later and the customary gesture sent the professor out of the room. 
Like many people, John Heitzman began to recall his past. He had at least something of an understanding of what the professor had said to him. He could try to find happy moments from his past life, and they might have a positive effect. The problem was, though, that everything he had experienced in his life seemed not just devoid of anything pleasant, it was uninteresting and even senseless. 
Heitzman remembered how he took his father's advice and married the daughter of a billionaire, thereby adding to his empire's wealth. The marriage did not bring him any satisfaction, his wife turned out to be barren, and after ten years of conjugal life she died of an overdose of narcotics. 
Then he married a famous fashion model, who was the very picture of a wife passionately in love. But just six months after the wedding his security service showed him snapshots of his wife cavorting with her former lover. He was not about to discuss it with her. He simply gave orders to his bodyguards to see to it that he would never have the occasion to see or be reminded about her again. 
By now in his recollections Heitzman had reached the starting-point of his participation in his father's empire. He had not been able to pinpoint even one pleasant instance that he felt like holding on to and use as a source of positive emotions. 
There was just one moment of pleasantness that he could remember. It was when he proved to his father that there was no need of becoming the sole owner of the Monetary Fund. Other investors in the fund, looking for a good return, would devote their mental energy to increasing the fund's capital, and thus would be working for them, for the Heitzmans. 
His father took some time to think about this. Then, several days later, at dinner time, he broke with his customary reticence to offer praise and said: 
"I agree with your proposal, John, regarding the Fund. 
You're on the right track. Congratulations! Go ahead and give some thought to other areas too. It's time for you take over the reins." 
For the next several days John Heitzman was in an upbeat mood. He ended up making several more decisions and increasing the profits of their financial-industrial empire even 
more. However, he no longer derived any special feeling of joy from this. 
The reports of increased profits were cold and dispassionate. 
No further praise would be coming his way. His father died, and praise from underlings brought no particular pleasure. 
John Heitzman continued going back in his recollections and reached the time of his childhood. The rare moments of contact with his father were dimly illumined in his thought. His ever-strict father, as a rule, would issue admonishments in the presence of nannies and teachers which he had hired for young John. 
Then all at once a wave of warmth rolled through the body of the billionaire lying motionless in his bed. His body gave a pleasant shiver. In Heitzman's recollections the curtain rose on a bright and very clear scene. He saw a far corner of the garden of his family's estate and there, surrounded by small acacia bushes, a little house about two metres high, with a single window. 
For some quite inexplicable reason all children yearn to create their own little house, their own space. That yearning is there, no matter whether the child has his own room in his parents' house or lives in the same room with his parents. With almost all children there comes a time when they start building their own little cubby-hole. In every Man, apparently, there is a gene that preserves some kind of ancient memory, telling him he ought to set up his own space. Whereupon any adult or child heeding this call, which arises from the depths of eternity, goes about setting it up at once. Never mind how amateurish it turns out by comparison with modern apartments, a Man who has built this for himself derives much more satisfaction from it than he would from the most chic and stylish apartment. 
And so the nine-year-oldJohn Heitzman, who had two spacious rooms all to himself in the family manor, still decided to build his own little house with his own hands. 
He constructed it out of plastic boxes that had been used for transplanting seedlings. These boxes turned out to be handy building materials. They came in a variety of colours. John made the walls using blue boxes, with a yellow border around the whole perimeter. He piled the boxes on top of each other, fastening them together in tongue-and-groove fashion. On one wall John made the box-bottoms face outward, which meant that the whole inside wall was comprised of a multitude of shelves. Boards with stapled-on plastic film served for the roof 
He spent a whole week building his little house, taking advantage of the three hours a day he was allotted for leisure walks in the fresh air. On the seventh day, just as soon as leisure time came, he headed straight for his creation in the far corner of the garden. Pulling back the acacia branches, he saw the house he had built and froze in astonishment. There by the entrance stood a little girl looking in the doorway of his creation. The girl was wearing a light-blue calf-length skirt and a white cardigan with frills on the sleeves. Her chestnutcoloured hair fell in ringlets around her shoulders. 
At first, youngJohn reacted with some jealousy to the presence of a stranger beside his creation, and he enquired with a hint of annoyance: 
"What are you doing here?" 
The girl turned her pretty little face toward him and re- 
plied: 
"I'm admiring." 
"What are you admiring?" 
"This marvellous and clever little house." 
"Wh-what kind of house?" young John queried in amazement. 
"Marvellous and most clever," repeated the girl. 
"Houses may be marvellous, but I've never heard them called clever," observedJohn thoughtfully. "Only people can be clever." 
"Yes of course, people can be clever. But when a clever person builds a house," the girl countered, "the house turns out to be something clever, too." 
''And what do you find clever about this house?" 
"The inside wall is very clever. It has ever so many shelves. 
You can put a lot of useful things on those shelves - toys, too." 
John was pleased at how this little girl reasoned things through. 
It flattered him, and possibly the girl herself pleased him. 
She's pretty, and reasons things through cleverly, he thought to 
himself And aloud he said: 
"This house I built." 
And he immediately added: 
"What's your name?" 
"I'm Sally, and I'm seven years old. I live here in the servants' quarters, since my dad works as a gardener here. He knows a lot about plants and is teaching me. I already know how to raise flowers and how to graft branches onto trees. And what's your name, and where do you live?" 
"I live in the manor-house. NIy name's John." "Does that mean you're the master's son?" "Yeah." 
"So, Johnnikins, let's play house!" "How do we play that?" 
"We play like we live in this house, the way grown-ups live. 
You can be the master, since you're the master's son, and I'll be your servant, since my dad's a servant." 
"That won't work," observed John. ''A servant's supposed to live in the servants' quarters. Only the husband, his wife and their children can live in the manor-house." 
"Then I shall be your wife!" exclaimed Sally, and asked: 
"Can I be your wife, Johnnikins?" 
John did not answer. He went into the house, took a glance around, and then turned to look at Sally who was still standing just outside the doorway. He said rather brusquely: 
"Okay, come on in and pretend you're my wife. We have to think about how we're going to decorate the inside." 
Sally stepped into the house. She looked into John's eyes with tenderness and excitement and said, almost in a whisper: 
"Thank you, Johnnikins. I shall try to be a good wife to you." 
John did not come to his house every day. During the time allotted for leisure walks he was not always allowed to play in the garden. Escorted by bodyguards and tutors, he would be taken instead for a visit to a city park or Disneyland, or go horseback-riding. 
But when he managed to get away to his little house, he almost always found Sally waiting for him. With each sueceedingvisitJohn took interest in the changes that had been occurring in the house. First of all a carpet appeared on the floor, contributed by Sally. Then little curtains on the window and over the entrance. 
Next came a little round table with an empty photo-frame on it. Sally said: 
'Johnnikins, you're coming here less and less often. I keep waiting for you, but you don't show up. Give me a photograph of yourself, and I'll put it in this frame. I can look at your picture and it will make it easier waiting for you." 
John left her his photograph when he came to say good-bye to the house, and to Sally. He was going to be moving with his parents to another villa. 
Multibillionaire John Heitzman lay on his bed in his fancy apartment and smiled as he recalled, with ever greater detail, his childhood contact with the little girl Sally. It was only now that he realised that this little girl loved him. She loved him with her first childhood love - reckless, unanswered and sincere. Perhaps, just perhaps, he loved her, too, or perhaps she was just a passing fancy. But she loved him as probably no one else would love him the rest of his life, and so the memories attached to the little house he built in the garden and his contact with Sally still evoked in him a lot of warm and pleasant feelings. These feelings warmed his body and made him feel good. 
After leaving the manor-house, he met with Sally one more time, eleven years later. But this time... New feelings excited his whole body. John Heitzman even sat up a bit in his bed. His heart had started chasing the blood through his veins with ever-increasing strength. That meeting... He had forgotten about it. He had never thought about it all this time. But now it occupied all his thoughts and made him excited. 
He came back to the estate where he had spent his childhood, returning after eleven years just for a day's visit. That was all the time he could afford. After lunch he went out into the garden, and somehow he found himself heading down to the far corner of the garden, where in among the acacia bushes he had built his little house. As he pushed back the branches and stepped into the little glade, he literally froze in astonishment. The house he had built out of plastic boxes eleven years ago stood on the same spot as before. But all around... All around were little beds of flowers, and a sandcovered path led to the entrance, where a little bench was now standing. And the house itself was wreathed in flowers. The bench had not been there before, but it was there now, the grown-up John noted to himself He pushed aside the
Love - the essence of the Cosmos 
All of a sudden a figure appeared on the roadway ahead. He was standing practically smack dab in the middle of the travel lane with his back to my oncoming jeep. I began braking at once, so as to carefully go around this strange-looking greyheaded figure. 
When I got within ten metres of him, the old fellow quietly turned around and I instinctively pressed the brake pedal to the floor. 
There in front of me on the roadway stood none other than Anastasia's grandfather. I recognised him at once. His grey hair and beard were a complete contradiction to his incredibly young, sparkling eyes - a discrepancy which immediately set him apart from many of his peers. And the long grey raincoat of indeterminate cut from goodness-knowswhat material was also something I was able to recognise all too easily. 
Still, I had a hard time believing my eyes. After all, how could this oldster from the Siberian taiga turn up here in the heart of Russia, on a roadway leading from Vladimir to the city of Suzdal?' How, indeed? By coach and horses? How could this Siberian recluse hope to master all the intricacies of our transportation networks? Add to that a complete absence of any kind of identification documents. 
I Vladimir (pron, vla-DEE-meer), Suzdal (pron. SOOZ-dal) - two of Russia's oldest historic cities, located not far east of Moscow. For further information sec footnote I in Book 5, Chapter 6: '~garden for eternity". 
Money, of course, he could have laid his hands on, by selling dried mushrooms and cedar nuts,' as his granddaughter Anastasia had done. But with no identification... 
Of course we have lots of homeless people without identification, and the police can't do anything about it. ButAnastasia's grandfather is far from resembling your average homeless person. Sure, he was dressed in old shabby clothes, but they were always clean, and his appearance was well-groomed, his face was bright and a light blush adorned his cheeks. 
I sat there, unable to move, behind the wheel of the jeep. 
He came over and I opened the half-door for him. 
"Hi there, Vladimir!" the old fellow greeted me as though there were nothing unusual about the circumstances. "You heading to Suzdal? Can you give me a lift?" 
"Yes, of course I can. Hop in! How did you end up here? 
How on earth did you manage to get here all the way from the taiga?" 
"How I got here isn't important. The main thing is why I came." 
"Well, why did you come?" 
"To take a tour into real Russian history with you, and to dispel your resentment toward me. My granddaughter Anastasia told me to. She said to me: 'Grandpakins, you are to blame for his resentment.' So here I am, joining you on the tour. That's why you're going to Suzdal, isn't it?" 
"Yes, I want to go see the museum. And I really did feel resentment, only it's gone now." 
We rode for some time in silence. I recalled how frosty our parting had been back in the taiga. In fact, we didn't even say good-bye. It had happened like this: 
cedar nuts - referring to the fruit of the Siberian cedar (Siberian pine, Pinus sibirica), known in the West as 'pine nuts'. This tree is akin to the European stone pine - see footnote 4 in Book I, Chapter I: "The ringing cedar" (esp. the znd edition). 
Anastasia's grandfather had recommended I set up a political party. He suggested calling it the Motherland Party. 3 
The idea of forming a party based on Anastasia's ideas had actually been noised about for some time, by various people. Many believed a political party was essential to make it easier for people to acquire land for the building of family domains and head off any kind of encroachment on the part of government officials, since none of the existing parties, regrettably, had even considered such questions in their platform. 
In view of the fact that there are some sort of powers opposed to Anastasia's ideas and that all sorts of attempts have been made to discredit not only the ideas themselves but also people who have been attracted by them, as well as Anastasia and me, it was suggested to draft the party's constitution without any reference in its ''Aims and objectives" section to creating favourable conditions for the setting up of kin's domains. Nor should there be any mention of Anastasia's ideas, or the Ringing Cedars Series. 
The would-be organisers were trying to persuade me that this would be the only way to get the party officially registered. And so I decided to consult with Anastasia's grandfather on this question, as well as on the topic of the party's structure, its primary aims and objectives. I surmised that since he was well acquainted with the acts of the priests who were constantly setting up all sorts of societal structures and religions which had lasted millennia, he must surely know about the secret organisational tenets underlying such longevity. 
Besides, he himself was a priest of some standing." Quite possibly, even stronger than the ones currently ruling the 
3See Book 8, The New Civilisation, end of Chapter 12: "People power". 4Anastasia's grandfather inherited the priesthood when his own father, Moisey, passed on. The first reference to the family's priestly status comes in Book 7, Chapter 7: ''A conversation with Anastasia's grandfather". 
world. If so, then he must certainly be aware of the principles underlying the priesthood itself, which had turned out to be more resilient than religion. 
Indeed, the priesthood was and is a suprareligious structure, since the priests took direct part in the creation of certain religions and secular institutions. This is clear from the history of Ancient Egypt and other countries. 
It followed that Anastasia's grandfather would be able to set forth certain fundamentals for the Motherland Party, making it a most powerful, if not the most powerful, institution. 
I sincerely wanted to hear what he had to say on this, and so I took advantage of what I thought was a moment when he was not immersed in his inner contemplations, and said: 
"You were speaking about a party. My readers, too, have been talking about this for some time. But some of them are recommending that I don't include any mention in its constitution of Anastasia, or her ideas, or the books - so that the registration will go smoothly." 
The grey-haired old fellow stood before me, leaning on his father's staff, without saying a word. It wasn't just that he kept his silence - he stared at me fixedly; as though seeing me for the first time. His eyes reflected more criticism than kindness. 
And when he did start speaking again after a lengthy pause, his voice, too, betrayed notes of disdain. 
"Registration, you say. So, you've come to ask my advice? 
To betray or not to betray?" 
"What's this about betrayal? I came to consult with you on how to proceed so that the registration will go smoothly." 
"Registration, after all, is not an end in itself, Vladimir. 
Even the party is not an end in itself No ideas, you say; not even a mention? So how are readers going to realise that it's their Motherland Party, and not just some mercantile traitors' party? You've been asked to set up some kind of meaningless 
organisation - without any basis, idea, or symbols which would already guarantee leadership for centuries to come. And now you've come to ask me whether you shouldn't follow their advice. Don't tell me you couldn't see through even this simple trick?" 
realised I had got myself into a rather sticky situation, and so 1 tried to get out of it by asking another question: 
"I only wanted to see if there were some principles you could recommend including in the draft of the party's constitution, its aims and objectives?" 
What happened next nearly drove me out of my mind. As it seemed to me back then, the old fellow was not only refusing to answer my questions, he had started making fun of me in a high-handed way. First he looked at me wide-eyed, then he gave a kind of irritated chuckle and turned away, even taking a step back from me. But then he turned around again and said: 
"Don't you understand, Vladimir? All the answers to the questions you raise should be given birth within yourself, and within everyone who joins you in creating the party's structure. Sure, 1 can give you a hint. But tomorrow someone else will give you another hint, and then a third, and you won't act - all you'll do is focus your attention on the hints. Go right, go left, you'll all go forward and then backward again or keep going round in circles because of the laziness of your minds." 
strongly resented this latter phrase. Over the years since my first meeting with Anastasia I've been stretching my mind to the limit day and night. Maybe it's starting to overheat from the constant stress of the work. I've published eight books now and have often taken to contemplating what is written in them myself Sometimes I've found myself pondering the accuracy of particular phrases time and again. And surely the old fellow must know all about this. 
Even though my resentment was starting to become inflamed, I managed to restrain myself, explaining: 
"Indeed, it seems as though everybody thinks and reflects, and various political systems are set up - communist, democratic, centrist. But as someone once said, no matter what party we aim to create, it all ends up looking like the Communist Party's Central Committee!" 
"That's very true. That's what I've been telling you you're going round in circles because of the laziness of your minds." 
"What's 'laziness of mind' got to do with it? Maybe it's simply that not enough information is available?" 
"So, there's not enough information out there and you've come to me to get it, eh? But if your mind is lazy, will you be able to make any sense of it?" 
I could feel my resentment increasing, but I endeavoured to conceal my irritation and continued: 
"Okay, I'll try to make my brain work harder." 
"Then pay attention. The party should be structured along the lines of the Novgorod uiecbe - I mean, in its early period. You'll figure out the rest later." 
This answer made me really angry. The oldster knew perfectly well that documents on pre-Christian Russia were nowhere to be found - they had all been destroyed. So nobody could ever tell how this Novgorod vieche worked, especially in 
5vieche (also spelt: veche) - an ancient form of self-governance in which a circle of local residents collectively discussed and decided questions of importance by general consensus. In later times, the term vieche was used to describe an assembly of freemen which served as a governing council in a number of cities of Western Russia from the tenth to the fourteenth centuries, even longer in the city of Novgorod (about roo km south of St. Petersburg). Not unlike the Ting in Scandinavian (esp, Icelandic) communities, these latter assemblies had the power (among other things) to enact local legislation, appoint and dismiss princes, wage war and conclude treaties with other territories. 
its early period. That meant he was mocking me. But why? What had I done to make him -? 
Trying to restrain myself out of respect for his age, I apologised: 
"Excuse me for disturbing you. You were probably occupied in something important. I'll leave you."
And I turned around to go, but he called after me: 
"But the aim or objective of the Motherland Party should be the creation of favourable conditions for the restoration of the energy of Love to families. It is essential to bring back the rites and celebrations which can help find one's 'other half', one's soulmate." 
"What?" I turned to face the old fellow again. "Love? 
Bring it back to families? I realise you don't want to talk serious with me. But why are you making fun of me?" 
"I'm not making fun of you, Vladimir. It is you who are not capable of understanding what it's all about. If you don't train yourself to contemplate, it can take years to figure out." 
"Figure out what? You have at least a rough idea what kinds of aims and objectives parties allover the world write into their constitutions?" 
"I have a rough idea." 
"Then tell me, if you know that. Tell me!" 
"They claim they will definitely raise the standard of living for everyone, and will offer people greater freedom." 
"Exactly. And in particular they promise industrial development, guaranteed housing and control over inflation." 
"Nonsense. Utter nonsense!" the oldster chortled. "Nonsense??? Yes, it will be nonsense if I follow your advice and put in as a basic tenet of the party's constitution: The Party will work toward the goal of helping every individual find their soulmate. 
''And you can add: The Party will restore to the people a way of life and rites capable of pre serving love in families forever." 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
"What on earth are you talking about??!! You - you want to make a laughingstock of me in front of everybody? Questions like this - like searching for one's soulmate - this is what marriage agencies do, on a commercial basis. If I include statements like that in the party's platform, it'll end up being not a party but a dating service! And as for love in families, well, that's a personal matter for families, and nobody, no political party, has the right to interfere in family affairs. That's none of the State's business." 
"But don't tell me your State isn't made up of families! 
Aren't families the basis of any State?" 
"They are, they are! That's why the State is obliged to raise the standard ofliving both for families and for individual citizens." 
'~nd what then?" the old fellow snapped. "By raising the standard ofliving in the country, will you then restore love to a great many families?" 
"I don't know. But it is accepted that states should care about the welfare of their citizens." 
"Vladimir, ponder for a moment what that word welfare means. Calm down and delve into its meaning. Now I'm going to say it just a little differently: wellfaring or faring well, that is, a state of well-being. If you think about it, you'll realise that love alone is capable of raising any Man's wellbeing to the highest possible level - not money or palaces, but only the feeling given to Man6 by the Creator - the state of love. 
"Love is the essence of the Cosmos. Living, thinking, with an advanced intellect. It is powerful, and it's no wonder God 
Man - Throughout the Ringing Cedars Series, the word Man with a capital M is used to refer to a human being of either gender. For details on the word's usage and the important distinction between Man and human being, please see the Translator's Preface to Book 1. 
Love - the essence of the Cosmos 
was so excited about it, giving its great energy as a gift to Man. lt is imperative to try to understand love, and not be shy about paying attention to it even on the national level. 
''And when the nation is comprised of a multitude of families giving birth to their children in love and creating a Space of Love, it will not suffer from lawlessness or inflation. Such a nation will have no need to fight against criminal tendencies; they will disappear from society. And all the prophets with their cunning philosophising will be silenced. Whether they foolishly neglected to mention it or whether it was simply beyond their comprehension is unimportant, but they led people away from the most important thing to a place where there is no love. 
"The priests knew about this, and consequently humoured the prophets. 
"For centuries mankind had been creating rites in aid of life and love. Whether these rites were suggested by the Creator or the people's own wisdom had perfected them is unimportant. They; in fact, over the centuries, created a state of well-being and helped young people obtain love and joy in perpetuity. None of these rites was characterised by occult superstition, as today. Each one served as a school of higher learning, an examination by the Universe. 
''Anastasia told you about the Vedruss? wedding rite that dates back centuries. You mentioned it in just one of your books.f but it deserves to be mentioned in every book. It is far from being fully comprehended by people living today; including you. 
"If you remember, she also told you about ancient ways of searching for your one to love. But again, you today have not 
7Vedruss - referring to a people prevalent in pre-Christian Russia, from which Anastasia is descended see Book 6, Chapter 4: ''A dormant civilisation". Vedis a Slavic root signifying 'awareness' or 'to know'. 
8See Book 6, Chapter 5: "The history of mankind, as told by Anastasia". 
been able to make sense of them. My granddaughter said: 'I, apparently, have not created strong enough images.' She takes all the blame upon herself, but I claim that the laziness of your mind (or minds) is also to blame. 
"Let the best learned men study the Vedruss wedding rite letter by letter. They won't - and you'd better believe me, Vladimir - they won't find a single occult or superstitious act. It is an act which is both rational and exactly suited to love's creation. Compared to it, you will see how absurd are today's wedding celebrations - traditions smacking of occultism and superstition. 
"You must realise that Anastasia knows immeasurably more than she tells you. Her acts, her logic, her behaviour are not immediately understood even by the priests, who subsequently can only marvel at what my granddaughter has done. 
"Enquire of her and inspire her with your question. Ask her what rite the Vedruss people had for childbirth. 
"Don't count on her to bring the subject up. She takes care to talk to you only about what she thinks interests you. But you don't have the slightest idea of what tremendous hidden wisdom lies in the ancient rites. They are the creation of cosmic worlds. 
''Any world that forgets the wisdom of its age-old forebears deserves derision. It makes no difference whether an individual has forgotten on his own or under the influence of the priests who have mastered the occult sciences. 
"Enquire of my granddaughter and inspire her with your question. And summon your party to the creation of love. Until that happens, you are of little interest to me. You need to have the most obvious things explained to you at length. Show forgiveness to an old man. Go. I do not find it useful to talk and think of unpleasantries." 
The old fellow turned and started slowly walking away. 
I stood there all alone in the taiga, feeling I had been spat 
II 
upon. The resentment I had felt right from the start of our conversation prevented me from making sense of everything he said. But subsequently; upon returning home, I mentally went back to our conversation in the taiga, pondering it and analysing it. I very much wanted to prove - perhaps not so much to Anastasia's grandfather as to myself - that I had not become completely lazy of mind. 
I wanted to either disprove or confirm what he said - within myself 
Back in the taiga, the oldster had told me that as long as people are content merely to listen to hints and not begin to think about the essence of life for themselves, society will never be free from its cycle of social upheavals. And Man will never be happy. 
I guess that's the way it is. 
He also talked about the existence of some kind of programme created by God. Now, what might that be? To what extent does the life of Man today correspond with this programme? 
CHAPTER Two 
Do our lives correspond to the Divine programme? 
A Man was born in the operating room on the second floor of a hospital. The doctors were surprised to see an absolutely healthy baby. 
Days and months flew by like seconds. The child attended kindergarten, then school, then university. 'Wise' educators, teachers and professors instilled in him some kind of programme oflife. 
The Man decided that the most important thing in life was to have lots of money, which would enable him to feed himself well, have an apartment, a car and clothing. And he began to work hard, sometimes even taking two shifts a day. 
Still, the seconds dragged out into years, and when he reached retirement he had been able to earn enough for a modest two-room flat and a used car. 
Long before retiring, he fell in love, got married, divorced and re-married. His first wife bore him a child, but after the divorce the child stayed with his mother. A child was born from the second marriage, but he went off to the Far North. They talked on the telephone once or twice a year. Seconds counted down the years of the Man's old age. He took ill and died. 
Such is the sad fate of the majority of people living on the Earth today. 
There is a minority who manage to become famous entertainers, politicians, presidents or millionaires. Life for this category of people is considered to be more happy, but that 
Do our lives correspond to the Divine programme? 13 
is an illusion. Their cares are no fewer than anyone else's, and their end turns out exactly the same: old age, disease and death. Was such a fate included in the Divine programme for residents of the Earth? No! 
The Creator could not predestine such a sad and cruel fate for His children. It was human society itself, under the influence of some kind of powers, that ignored the Divine programme and started down a path of self-torture and self-destruction. 
Perhaps somebody doubts the existence of the Divine programme of human life? After all, it is not something our scholars or politicians talk about. 
Religions propound God's design, but invariably through intermediaries and mostly in different ways. About the only thing they agree on is that God exists. 
Philosophers and many scholars, too, believe in the existence of a higher, rational, intelligent being that has created the visible world and earthly life. It is impossible not to believe this. Everything comprising our world, after all, is too logically interconnected for it to be otherwise. Well, if that is the case, then a supremely rational being could create only in a meaningful way, create only that which is eternal, and predestine a joyful perspective for all living beings - first and foremost, His beloved Man, made in His likeness. Man, in other words, is offered a specific way of life on the Earth which allows him to become aware of himself and all creation - to learn about and continue to carry out the Divine programme, contributing his own marvellous creations thereto. God desires from His son, Man, conjoint creation and joy for all from its contemplation. 1 
lSee Book 4, Chapter 2: "The beginning of creation". 
There is no doubt that God's programme exists, and it is not just a select group that can become acquainted with this programme, but everyone who wishes to do so. The Divine programme is not set forth in letters or hieroglyphs on sheets of papyrus, but in living signs of Nature - Nature as God has created it- and which belong only to Him. 
The minds and intellects of the people of the Ancient Russian period still allowed them to read the grand Book of the Divine. Out of the billions of such letter-signs, the majority of people living today are acquainted with but a few, and we must begin anew to study the Divine alphabet. 
The book I am writing at the moment is not on a religious theme. It is not an attempt at sheer philosophising. This book is a call to research, to becoming aware of the Divine programme. 
I am not about to teach anyone or preach anything. I only want to acquaint my readers with information on the culture of our forebears, through the rites perfected by the 'wisemen" through careful calculation and designed to preserve family love, and to call upon everyone to disprove or confirm the arguments presented. 
I was prompted to publish this material by the sayings and logical conclusions of the Siberian recluses, especially Anastasia. 
Publication is needed in order to let the information seep through to the level of one's own feelings and, through collaborative efforts, to start to act according to the logic oflife, as well as in the hope that our generation will begin to contemplate, and then accelerate the building of a new civilisation for themselves and their children. 
2wise-men (Russian: volkhvy) - a reference to ancient 'scientists' with particular knowledge of the workings of Nature, often possessing exceptional powers. For further information, see footnote 13 in Book 7, Chapter 20: 
"Pagans". 
Do our lives correspond to the Divine programme? 15 
It is possible that Anastasia has conceptually outlined just the first point in the programme of mankind's development, to wit: 
Human society should study the Divine programme, using the materials God has provided, and transforming the whole planet into a marvellous Paradise oasis, thereby creating a harmoniously balanced society for all living beings. Man's attainment of this level of life will open up possibilities for the creation of life on other planets and in other galaxies. 
Against the background of this grand concept, Anastasia first proposed the creation of family domains. 
Let us too begin our research by examining commonly known and outwardly simple issues. 
CHAPTER THREE 
Why does love come and go? 
Oh, how many poems and philosophical treatises have been devoted to this very feeling! In fact, it is hard to find a literary work where it is not touched upon to some extent. Nearly all religions talk about love. It is considered to be a great feeling imparted to Man by God. 
The reality of our current human conditions, however, portrays the feeling oflove as a most sadistic phenomenon. 
Let's face the truth. Statistics show that sixty to seventy percent of marriages are doomed to failure. The failure comes after years of an uneasy coexistence on the part of two people who were once in love. Sometimes these years are marked by mutual insults, scandals and even face-smashing. 
The original beautiful and inspired feeling vanishes, only to be replaced by years of anger, insults, hatred and, ultimately, unhappy children. 
This is the sad result of what we call love today. 
Could such a result be considered a gift from God! No way! 
But perhaps it is we ourselves who turn aside from some kind of way of life inherent in Man, and that is why love vanishes, telling us, in effect: I can't live in such conditions. Your way of life is killing me. And you yourselves are dying. 
Remembering my conversation in the taiga, I recalled how unusually the grey-haired recluse talked about love. "Love," he said, "is the greatest and most powerful energy in the Cosmos. It is never thoughtless. It has thoughts and its own feelings too. Love is a living, self-sufficient entity, a living being. 
"By the will of God it is sent to the Earth, ready to bestow its great energy on every Earth-dweller and make their lives eternal in love. It comes to each one of them, endeavouring to tell them, through the language of feelings, about the Divine programme. If Man doesn't listen, it is forced to leave, not by its own will, but by Man's." 
Love! A mysterious feeling. And even though almost every Man who has ever lived on the Earth has managed to experience it, love remains largely uninvestigated. 
On the one hand, the theme of love is touched upon in most works of prose and poetry, and in most artistic genres. On the other, all the information these contain merely establishes the existence of such a phenomenon. At best, it describes but the outward manifestations oflove and variations in behaviour on the part of different people under the influence of the feeling as it has appeared in them. 
But is it really necessary to investigate the feeling of love, which everybody knows? 
The extraordinary and brand new information I received in the Siberian taiga confirms that investigation is extremely necessary. We need to learn to understand love. 
I believe one of the most accurate answers to the question as to why love fades is simply that it vanishes when it finds no understanding. 
People in the past understood love. 
Judge for yourselves: more than ten thousand years ago the Vedruss people possessed knowledge enabling them to carry out actions which not only strengthened love but made it everlasting. One such action was the Ancient Vedic wedding rite. After the description was published in one of my books, many academic researchers came round to affirming that this particular rite was capable of transforming an initially flaring feeling into a permanent one. Comparing it with the rites of various peoples both past and present, I began more and more to draw 
the conclusion that the Ancient Vedic wedding rite was a rational deed thought up by the wisdom of the people, which is capable even today of helping many family couples find lasting love. However, let's go through everything in order. 
And let us begin with the most important thing. 
Should we seek out our 'other half'? 
'My other half' - 'my soulmate' - it's a popular expression. Let's see what it means, exactly. I think many people will accept the following definition: a man or a woman close to you in spirit and their views on life, a pleasant communicator, someone you feel attracted to (including their appearance), someone capable of inspiring you to love. 
Should we seek out our soulmate, or let our 'other half' be found all on its own, through the will of destiny? 
As many centuries of mankind's experience has shown, a determined search is essential. This is attested in multitudes of stories in which stout-hearted young men have set off on long quests in search of their intended. 
There are a number of ancient rites which can aid this most important search of one's life. 
There are ancient rites, too, which can help determine whether one has made the right choice. What if that 'other half' has come to you straight from the devil himself? 
Some of these rites I have already described in my previous books. I did not touch upon well-known rituals, but mostly introduced rites that are not commonly known and have not 
been encountered heretofore. The present book focuses on the wedding rite and, at the same time, the rite for determining whether one has made the right choice of partner, which I shall go over again in a different context. 
"Then get on with it - show us these miraculous rites," some of my readers may be thinking. "Why bother with all these expositions?" But the expositions are absolutely essential! We need a vision of our reality today, otherwise we shall not understand the tremendous signification of the wisdom of the people. Everything in the world is relative and, hence, comparisons are crucial. 
So let's now take a look and see which life situations in today's world can facilitate a meeting and which may just get in the way. 
Strange as it may seem, in our present so-called 'information age', situations favouring a meeting of two 'halves' are getting harder and harder to find. 
People living in large, densely populated megacities are virtually cut off from each other by invisible barriers. Someone living in a modern multi-storeyed apartment block is often unacquainted with his next-door neighbour.' Passengers on public transport, even those standing jam-packed shoulderto-shoulder in the aisles, are all absorbed in their own individual problems. Pedestrians walking along the same street have no reason to communicate with each other. 
And in America, for example, you can't even look closely at a woman without being suspected of sexual harassment. 
And so, just sitting in your flat or travelling to work or studies, there's practically no opportunity to find your soulmate. 
Let's say your work involves contact with a lot of different people. Let's say you're sitting at a cash register in a large 
'For a description of what this means in Russian apartment blocks, see footnote I in Book 8, Chapter 13: "A new civilisation". 
supermarket. But none of the customers passing by you every day thinks of striking up an acquaintance with you. It's more likely they see you merely as an adjunct to the cash register. 
A college or university where a whole lot of young people congregate, though it indeed offers opportunities for conversation and coupling, is not a place for general selection of one's soulmate, since an educational institution is designed with a completely different function in mind. 
Today the most acceptable locales for meeting people are generally bars, restaurants, discotheques and resorts. But encounters here, even those which end in marriages, do not, as a rule, result in a happy life in love and harmony. According to statistics, ninety percent of such marriages end in divorce. 
The principal cause lies in a false image. And what might that be? Well, here's an example. 
False images 
Back before I met Anastasia I took a two-week cruise on the Mediterranean Sea. 
Each day in the ship's dining room my mealtime companions were three young people - two women and a man - who worked in a design institute in Novosibirsk. Each day the girls appeared in new and stylish clothing, with intriguing hairdos. It was a delight to chat with them. Nadia and Valia,' 
2Nadia - an informal variant of the name Nadezhda (the Russian word for 'hope'); valia - an informal variant of Valentina. 
as they were called, were always cheerful and outreaching. One time I found their male companion in his cabin, and I asked him: 
"What pretty and pleasant girls we have at our table! 
Maybe we can make some time with them?" 
To which he replied: 
"I have no desire to make time with riff-rafflike that." "Why'riff-raff,?" 
"'Cause I work with them in the same institute and I know what they're really like." 
'And what are they really like?" 
"In the first place, they're rowdies. Secondly, they're lazy and slovenly. It's only here that they try to keep up appearances and make people think they're nice and smart. It's quite clear they've come here specially to find themselves husbands among the wealthier class. You've noticed how they play up to the Armenian men on board." 
I had an opportunity to see for myself the discrepancy he mentioned when I paid a subsequent late-afternoon visit to the design institute to see my table companions from the cruise ship. To put it mildly, they weren't nearly as impressive as they had been on board, and all their former cheerfulness and pleasantness had somehow vanished. 
Which means that back on the ship they were putting on a false image. 
Many men and women in the world today try to find their 'other half' with the aid of an external image which doesn't correspond with their real nature. Perhaps such a sad phenomenon is due to an obliviousness to other possible methods? In that case both parties end up being deceived. 
A man will give flowers and expensive gifts to an image which has taken his fancy. He may go so far as to offer her his hand and his heart. Then, after marriage, all of a sudden he sees her real character, which doesn't appeal to him at all. He 
feels a sense of irritation and a yearning for the earlier image which has now vanished.
A woman all of a sudden sees that the suitor who only recently was so kind and attentive to her doesn't love or understand her at all. How did this happen? But he never did love her - he only loved the image. 
The striking discrepancy between the artificial image and the real person is particularly evident in the case of entertainment celebrities, especially if you should happen to see them in their everyday lives. 
A situation no less unfortunate arises from the fact that women often change their outward appearance after marriage. 
When a man falls in love with a woman, especially at first sight, it is difficult to say what, specifically, has aroused the feeling oflove in him. Perhaps it was the colour of her hair or the way she plaited her braid, or maybe her eyes. It is customary to think that the feeling of love is aroused by the whole gamut of external and internal traits. And when a woman changes her external appearance, she thereby takes away part of her appeal and weakens the love between them. Even if following a radical change of clothes, hairdo and make-up, everybody around tells her how beautiful and attractive she's become, and even if these compliments ring true, and even if her husband gets excited over his wife's new look, it may be only a matter of time before his love begins to fade or disappears altogether. 
After all, he has glimpsed a great many beautiful women who are a lot more attractive than his wife at present. Still, he has fallen in love specifically with her, and with the appearance she had when they first met. And all of a sudden that previous image is no longer there. And you will, no doubt, agree that in falling in love with the new image, he thereby betrays the image she presented before. 
Why does love come and go? 
Why were people in ancient times so cautious about changing their clothing? Perhaps they didn't have much in the way of a selection of fabrics? But they did. They imported silks from far across the seas, and they themselves knew how to weave cloth, either coarse or fine. They could do all sorts of designs on the cloth with different colouring agents, or embroider them. 
Perhaps they were lacking in imagination or finances? 
They had plenty of imagination - an abundance, in fact. Practically every other person was a fine artist or designer. You only have to look at houses from those times - how they are all decorated with wood-carvings. 
And every woman was a master of embroidery. As for finances, both people of modest means and even those well-off were very conservative when it came to changes of clothing or hairdos. They were extremely cautious about altering their own appearance, being careful to preserve their image. 
The current fashion world, especially women, is wont to change their image like a kaleidoscope. 
Such extreme fashion swings are extraordinarily profitable to the clothing manufacturing industry, when people throw out things that are still perfectly serviceable and buy new fashions in the hopes that they will bring something new in the way of a semblance of happiness. But no, it never comes. In its place appears only a new artificial image someone has created - an image people put on under the influence of aggressive propaganda. 
In all the round of modern life I never have discovered any efficient system of measures designed to help people find a life-long companion. Not only that, but I have been getting more and more the impression that our modern living - indeed, our whole way of life - is designed in such a way that we shall never meet our true soulmate. Maybe this situation even works to somebody's advantage. A Man who is 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
dissatisfied with life, who has no goals or meaning in his life, can be a profitable catch for many a man out to make money. Not to mention profitable to the powers that be. 
As to the question of whether or not we are actually seeking out our 'other half', I think the answer will be: no, we are not. We don't know how to. And there are no favourable conditions to facilitate the search. 
I attempted to discover sagacious hints on finding one's soulmate in the rites of bygone centuries. I shall cite a few typical examples of wedding rites. Let us examine just how sagacious - or primitive - they are. I shall include my own commentaries as we go along, but if you don't happen to agree with them, you can always cross them out, or white them out and write in your own, right here in the book. 
I find myself tapping more and more into the feeling that Anastasia's grandfather is right: if we don't start thinking for ourselves, we'll go on accepting any sort of crap as the wisdom oflife. 
I shan't even name modern weddings. Apart from drunkenness, tripping around in cars and laying flowers at the socalled 'eternal flame',' there's precious little worth saying. 
Let's take a closer look, then, at some earlier wedding rites. 
3layingflowers at the 'eternal flame' (i.e., at tomb of the unknown soldier) a common practice among Russian newlyweds which takes place shortly after the wedding ceremony. 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Wedding rites 
I shall cite a typical rite from pre-revolutionary Russia with a view to examining it from the standpoint of social degradation in relation to love. 
Courting rituals in Perm. I Weddings for the people of Perm involve a whole complex of preliminary operations. First, a father has to seek permission from the local authorities and from the parish priest before setting about courting a bride for his son. This kind of procedure invariably takes place without the participation of the groom, evidently according to ancient custom, and is limited to just the opinion of relatives and close friends called in to give advice. And these are the ones who will decide the fate of their closest relative's future well-being. 
It happens that the groom first meets his intended only after the matchmaker has already reached an agreement with the bride's father, and sometimes not until the day of the wedding. Rarely does a young Permian have a chance to court his future bride on his own. The groom's father seeks out, on his son's behalf, a bride with a fair-sized dowry, a maiden of character and respectable moral standing. 
Once the final decision had been made as to which girl is to be targeted, the courting itself begins, known as the horasiam. This task is always entrusted to the family elder or, in 
Iperm a major city in the Ural Mountains, founded in 1781, located about 
r, ooo km east of Moscow on the Kama River. 
his absence, to the godfather or one of the older relations, or to someone who has had experience in such matters. 
It is further explained how and what the go-betweens should say. But it seems to me the whole process is utterly absurd, since the primary principle is violated right from the start. 
As we can see, there is not even a hint of the young people's love in carrying out this rite. Sad, too, is the fact that with this abusive attitude toward the energy of Love, they are implicating God. 
In preparation for the groom's departure to bring back his bride, the groom's mother (or matron of the house) places on the tablecloth a loaf of bread intended for the blessing of the groom, along with salt, beer and braga, 2 and lights the candles in front of the icons.' The groom prays and bows low at his mother's and father's feet, seeking their blessing. After reciting Jesus' prayer, he takes up a position at the table as all the wedding guests approach, reciting the same prayer. One after another they reach out with both hands to present the groom with the gifts and goodies they have brought: a cooked shoulder or cut of raw pork, always with bread, and each one chants: ''Accept these precious gifts, young prince", followed by the prayer "Lord Jesus Christ" and so forth. At this the groom replies to each one individually: "Amen to your prayer", before accepting (also with both hands) the gifts of food, placing each one first on his head and then on the table, and honours each wedding guest 
2braga - a mild, home-made brew. 
3icom - sacred paintings on wood. Every Russian Orthodox church features a multitude of icons, but at least one icon stands or hangs in a corner of the living or dining room in practically every Orthodox household, often with candles in front. 
with beer and braga (on rare occasions, wine) as he recites Jesus' prayer and intones: "Drink this to your health, (name of guest)." This naturally meets with a response from each wedding guest the groom addresses with the words ''Amen to your prayer". Taking the glass from the groom, he bows to the groom and intones: "May the Lord grant you long life, great happiness, good living," may He grant you to attain happiness, cattle, a full stomach, and bread and salt,' obtain a young princess, accompany the princess to the church as her swain, retain a standing position beneath the golden crowns and maintain the law of God!" And then the guest takes a drink. 
And here is some more intriguing information. 
Permian women rarely preserve their virginity, but their grooms pay no special attention to this and do not avoid such women, but rather accept them eagerly, even those who are pregnant, anticipating the speedy arrival of another worker in the family. It is said that the fathers in some families, considering their daughters to be blameless, will resent any attempt at matchmaking, will swear and even chase away the go-betweens, sometimes even beating them, saying: "What, you're telling me my daughter is penna?" - that is, guilty (from the word penya, meaning guilt). 
4good living the Russian term here is zbitda byt' (literally: "to live and to be"). This ancient expression indicates a distinction between life (which is given not only to Man, but also to plants and animals) and being (in the sense of existing in a space of conscious awareness -accessible only to Man). The now largely forgotten meaning of this phrase is a wish not only for a 'good life' but also for spiritual fulfilment. 
bread and salt (Russian: kbleb-sol) - a symbol of Russian hospitality (also found in other Slavic cultures), symbolising the earth (bread) and the Sun (salt). 
So we end up not with a continuer of the family line, conceived in love, but a worker for the household. 
There are, in fact, many characteristic features of wedding rites which portray our ancestors as wild barbarians. I should point out, however, that none of the rites we know of are traditionally Slavic, even though they're sometimes called 'traditional' in the literature on the subject. They stem from a period when the really traditional, wise rites were prohibited by the Church, with nothing rational offered in their place. So, for example: 
Removing of boots. It happened (and in some places still happens), according to a native Russian custom, that a newlywed woman is supposed to remove her husband's footwear. In ancient times this custom generally signified meekness, a servile attitude, even humiliation, since who would take off another's boots if she were not fully subordinate to the wearer of the boots? History teaches us that this custom existed at the time of Vladimir's reign," along with the fact that the prince of Polotsk's? daughter was unwilling to remove her husband's footwear. 
The same custom existed in Germany during Martin Luther's time: on their wedding night the young wife would take off her husband's boots and place them at the head of the bed as a sign of the husband's domination over the wife, the man over the (enslaved) woman. 
Olearius and von Herberstein8 observed from their stays in Moscow that even princes' and noblemen's weddings 
Vladimir I (?-I015) - Prince ofKiev(98o-I015), who accepted Christianity for Rus' in 988. See footnote 4 in Book 7, Chapter 20: "Pagans". 
7po! otsk - an ancient city in what is now Belarus, formerly under Polish and Lithuanian control, before the territory was absorbed into the Russian empire in 1772. The Polotskian princedom lasted from the roth to the 14th centuries. 
included the rituals of footwear removal along with three strokes of the whip (the whip was then placed, together with baked goods, in a special box). This rite was continued in Lithuania before the Jagiellonian dynasty? and is still preserved in peasant culture. 
As we can see, the taking off of boots and honouring the bride's slave status is mistakenly passed off as a traditional Russian rite. But before the princes came along, Russia had no slavery at all. Hence this rite is not traditional for our people, but a transient custom not accepted by the people at large. 
But there is one situation which strikes me as even more stupid, cruel and immoral - a situation typical of wedding rites among many peoples as late as the eighteenth or nineteenth centuries. 
Directly the last food dish is placed on the table - i.e., the roast - the best man wraps up the dish, along with the bread and salt, in a tablecloth and takes it to a bed in the hayloft, to which the young couple are led immediately afterward. Whereupon the father of the bride, in handing over his newlywed daughter to her husband, stands in the doorway of the hayloft and offers her seemly advice 
8Adam Olearius (born Adam Oblscbliigel; 16°3-1671) & Siegmund Freiberr von Herberstein (1486-1566) - Austrian and German diplomats, respectively, each of whom travelled to Russia in his time. Von Herberstein (sometimes spelt von Herbenstein), a German mathematician and geographer, visited Moscow in 1517 and again in 1526, setting forth his observations in a work entitled Notes on A10scow affairs; Olearius (also known as Omarius), a member of the Kaiser's council in Vienna, followed suit in the mid-1630S, and later published his Description of my travels to Muscooy. 
9Jagiellonian dynasty - a royal dynasty that began in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (1377-I392, I440-I572) and spread to other East European countries, including Poland, Ukraine and even parts of Russia. 
about marriage life. After the young couple have reached the bed, the wife of the master of ceremonies, wearing two coats at once (one in the normal fashion, the other turned inside out), showers them with grains, coins and hops, and feeds the young couple on their bed. 
The next morning all the wedding guests show up at the hayloft and quickly remove the blanket so as to determine by well-known signs whether the newlywed girl has been chaste at the time of her marriage. 
This part of the rite may be considered the most sinister and perverted, even if the newlyweds were in love with each other. In the sight of all the guests, the young people, having eaten and drunk their fill, were supposed to go to their room to consummate their marriage without fail, accompanied and encouraged by the lustful - one might even say; perverted - stares of the guests. 
In the first place, after all the ups and downs of the prenuptial preparations, not to mention the wedding itself, the free-flowing libations of alcohol and the generous intake of food, it is best to hold off sexual intimacy for a period of time, so as to avoid the conceiving of a child in such a condition. 
Secondly; why should newlyweds enter into intimate relations the same day and, on top of that, be called to account for their actions in front of the guests? What if the bride happens to be having her period on that day? All-in-all, it is something resembling the imposed mating of animals, or even worse. 
Nobody in their right mind would think of bringing a bitch to a male dog - or a cow to a bull, or a ewe to a ram - when the female is not in heat. But the attitude here is: you'd better get on with it, or you'll be put to shame. 
The following story was told me by a seventy-year-old man upon learning that I was investigating various rites: 
3I 
I was living in the country when I got married. They fixed me up with the one I loved. She was oh so quiet, and kind. Her name was Ksiusha." She was nineteen then, I was twenty. We had been looking at each other for about six months, and were probably in love. 
On the first night of our wedding, when everything was winding down, the two of us were sent to bed in a separate room. They placed a guard at the door, and the following morning they were supposed to hold up the sheet for all to see: was the blood of virginity there or not? The moment of decision for Ksiusha and me came. Maybe it was wedding jitters, or maybe something I ate, but I got the feeling nothing was going to happen between Ksiusha and me. She did this and that, and began awkwardly showing me her breasts, then she kissed me, and later got undressed completely. 
Only there was no proper reaction in me to her caresses and undressing, and I got more and more embarrassed. I sat down on the bed, and turned my face to the wall. I felt Ksiusha's cheek press against my back, I could feel her trembling and her tears running down my spine. I too began weeping for sorrow. There we were both sitting on the bed, crying our hearts out. After that I told her: 
"Don't worry, Ksiusha, I'll declare to everyone that it's 
my fault." 
And she replied: 
"Don't - they'll only make fun of you." 
Before the dawn came, she did the piercing herself with her finger, and the blood came out. In the morning they showed off the sheet to the great amusement of the guests who were once more imbibing in an effort to counteract the effects of their hangover. They summoned us in their 
IO Ksiusha - an endearing variant of the name Ksenia. 
half-drunk state, joking around and calling out Gor'ko, gor'koF1 before taking their next glass. 
Ksiusha and I lived together for six months in the country; then moved to the city and divorced. Turned out I couldn't get anything to happen all those six months. I married again, and now I have four kids - three sons and a daughter - and grandchildren too. But that horrendous wedding I'll never forget my whole life long. And I still remember Ksiusha to this day. 
"Gor'ko, gor'kol (lit. 'Bitter, bitter!') - the traditional call at Russian wedding receptions for the bride and groom to kiss (and thereby sweeten the 'bitter' wine). 
CHAPTER FIVE 
Conception involves more than flesh 
Those who have read my Book of Kin will remember that the Vedruss wedding rite I described ended with the loving couple, Liubomila and Radomir, conceiving a child. I 
But back then I wasn't about to ask Anastasia whether there were any particular aspects of the Vedruss civilisation concerning the conception of children, or whether or not it was worth paying special attention to this topic in any case. But, as though anticipating my question, she said: 
"The Vedruss people had a deep understanding of what was involved in the conception of their children. But for the moment I do not know how to talk about it in a way you will be able to understand." 
Later on, after my conversation with Anastasia's grandfather and my search for various peoples' rites capable of preserving love in families, I obtained some information on conception and realised that it had nothing to do with Anastasia - I was the one who had not been ready to comprehend what she said. Even now this question has not been sufficiently researched by modern science. 
Scholars have been attempting to clone Man, but it seems that even if they succeed, they will end up with an entity only superficially resembling Man. You see, it is not just the sperm and the egg that are involved in the act of conception, but something else besides - something invisible, something not tangible as matter. 
ISee the section entitled "A union of two - a wedding" in Book 6, Chapter 5: 
"The history of mankind, as told by Anastasia". 
It is possible that any further exposition of the information I obtained will be shocking to some. I spent six months pondering whether it was something worth sharing with my readers or not. In the end, I decided that it was. Here is what it's all about: 
Many families living on the Earth today are unknowingly raising children that are not their own in the fullest sense. This statement is supported by some weighty evidence. 
The scientific world has a term telegony. In medicine it is called the paternal impression phenomenon. They try to talk as little as possible about 'telegony'. What's this all about? 
The discovery began in England about a hundred and fifty years ago when Lord Morton decided to raise a new breed of horse with exceptionally resilient characteristics. At one point he crossed a thoroughbred mare with a zebra colt. But no offspring resulted, because of the genetic incompatibility of the two species. 
Some time later this purebred English mare was crossed with a purebred English colt. Subsequently the mare gave birth to a foal, only... with marked traces of stripes, as with a zebra. 
Lord Morton called this phenomenon telegony. 2 
2The 'zebra' was actually a quagga, an equine mammal of South Africa, with zebra-like stripes, which is now extinct. The experiment, conducted by a Scottish peer, the Right Honourable George Douglas, roth Earl of Morton (1761-1827), was reported in a communication he wrote to the Royal Society of London in 1820 and described in many journal pieces of the past - for example, by]. C. Ewart of the University of Edinburgh in an 1899 article "Experimental contributions to the theory of heredity. A. Telegony" published in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, vol. 65 (1899), pp. 243-51; and later in Menia S. Tye's article "Pre-natal influences" in The AmericanJournalofNursing, vol. 7, n" 5 (February 1907), pp. 362-67 (see esp. p. 365; here, as in some other sources, the experimenter's titular name is misspelt Marton). Tye also mentions a female hybrid resulting from the first 
Specialists in animal husbandry quite often encounter this phenomenon in their practice. Any dog-breeding club, for example, will dispose of even what was the most thoroughbred dam if it happened to mate with a mongrel. That particular dam would no longer produce thoroughbred pups, even if it were to be mated with the most thoroughbred sires. 
Pigeon breeders will not hesitate to kill even the most precious purebred pigeon if it has been violated by a non-thoroughbred male pigeon. Practice has shown that it will never produce purebred offspring. 
Scientists in various countries have done a great many studies showing that this phenomenon also extends to people. There have been instances where white parents have given birth to black children - where a black-skinned baby has come into the world as a result of a liaison between the grandmother or mother of the birthing woman and a black man. The cause of this phenomenon always turns out to be a previous relationship with a black man on the part of the girl or one of her direct progenitors.' 
But these are clearly distinguishable cases. How many others are there that are not clearly distinguishable? After all, 
union. And she subsequently observes (p. 366): "It would seem as though the Israelites had some knowledge of telegony, for in Deuteronomywe find when a man died leaving no issue, his wife was commanded to marry her husband's brother, in order that he might 'raise up seed to his brother" (italics ours). 
3While dozens of scientific articles on telegony were published in the r9th and the first two decades of the zoth century - by such luminaries, for example, as pioneer statistician Karl Pearson (r857-r936), subsequent acceptance of theories based on Gregor Johann Mendel's (r822-r884) 'laws of heredity' brought the concept of telegony into disrepute and many considered it "disproved". However, present-day genetics is far from being able to fully explain the mechanisms of heredity; and throughout the zorh century a great many prominent scholars have been conducting experiments and drawing conclusions quite at variance with the materialistic approaches of 'official' ('orthodox') science. 
pre-marital relations are the 'in' thing today. That being the case, there's no point in blaming the woman if she is not a virgin when she marries. It is our society, our monstrous sex propaganda and sex industry that have made her that way. 
In the West parents supply their school-age children with condoms, realising that they're no longer chaste. But what they don't know is that there is no condom that can counter the 'paternal impression phenomenon', or telegony. This is evidenced in concrete examples in the case of both people and animals. 
Many ancient teachings and religions also speak about the phenomenon of telegony. Even though they may call it something else, the substance is the same. Both scientists and wise-men of old have determined that the first man in the life of a virgin leaves his imprint on her in spirit and in blood - a mental and physical portrait of her offspring to come. All other men who enter into intimate relations with her thereafter for child-bearing purposes have nothing to offer her but their semen and diseases of the flesh. 
Isn't this what's behind the current massive lack of understanding of fathers and children? Not to mention the degradation of our whole human society of today? 
A multitude of specific examples testifies to the involvement of some kind of energy in the conception of children. But if that is the case, then it is not just scientists but the public at large that should know about it. 
It is probable that our recent forebears had some inkling of it. They tried to make sure that a girl entering into marriage was a virgin beyond the shadow of a doubt. It is possible that this is what lies behind the custom in many cultures of locking the newlyweds in a separate room, and subsequently hauling out and putting on display the blood-stained sheet in confirmation of the bride's virginity. 
Earlier ancestors of ours, however, did not consider virginity in itself sufficient to qualify someone to be a continuer of 
the line. They maintained that if a woman was engaged in intimate relations with one man while thinking about another, the resulting offspring would bear resemblance to the one she was thinking about. 
Such statements indicate that people of old assumed - and quite possibly knew for certain - that the most important factor in conception was thought. Or, more specifically, the energy of thought. 
The phenomenon of telegony also testifies to this. A woman, perhaps sub-consciously, retains information in her memory about the first man in her life. As a result, a child is born who either fully or partially resembles him. 
At first I hesitated to write about this subject for fear of provoking unpleasant questions among parents and their children, and between spouses - let them be happy in their ignorance. However, such happiness has not been all that noticeable. And perhaps one of the reasons it is not particularly noticeable is a lack of knowledge as to the culture of conception. 
The question of sex education courses for children in schools has been an issue for some time now. People argue over whether they should be introduced or not. If such courses touch only upon the use of condoms, there's no point in introducing the courses at all. If, however, children are told about the woman's chief purpose, about the correct approach to conceiving children, in that case the subject is absolutely essential. For that, however, the instructors must have a thorough grounding in the very essence of the question, and have appropriate literature available. It is a subject that must be discussed, even though the mass media, unfortunately, serves up nothing but sex propaganda. 
There is a lot of talk in so-called democratic countries about human freedom. But can a Man be called truly free when important questions of life are hidden from him, and 
in their place allegedly beneficial perversions are fobbed off on him through some kind of supposedly 'free' propaganda? In a situation like that it turns out that Man is 'liberated' only from a true and happy human life. 
Still, I wouldn't have written about telegony if I hadn't learnt from Anastasia about how to correct this situation, even if the marriage-bound woman has already had a relationship with another man. 
Not only that, but it turns out that the Vedruss people had a momentous rite through which 'stepchildren' could become one's own in blood and spirit. 
Our pagan ancestors, the Vedruss all the more so, were very well acquainted with what is known in modern medicine as the 'paternal impression phenomenon'. And through the help of special rites they were able to protect their young people against it. 
With the aid of particular acts or rites, wise-men, too, were able to erase the genetic code of the 'first sire' and make even girls who had been raped during enemy attacks absolutely clean. As proof of this, they were not afraid to let their sons take such women in marriage. 
However, there is one 'but'. It is impossible to understand and reproduce pagan (and especially Vedruss) rites simply through a knowledge of their outward aspects. They must be experienced through feeling. 
What's the use in just writing about it? It is essential to love, it is essential to prepare for the appearance of the child, it is important to give birth only at home, at the very place of conception. 
"To preserve love in the family for ever, it is essential to combine - into one - three points, three feelings, three planes of being". But what's the point in simply re-stating the words? An intellectual understanding is far from sufficient - it must be felt. The philosophy of our forebears must be felt. 
And the first essential act must be one of sheer repentance in respect to our forebears, who are now called pagans, who have been slandered and whom we have betrayed. We betrayed the traditional Slavic culture of our fathers and mothers - a culture that lasted for tens of thousands of years. Instead we started calling Christianity 'traditional' for RUS'.4 But in Rus' it has been around for a mere thousand years. There's no way it can be classified as 'traditional'. 
Why is repentance necessary? For the simple reason that if we go on thinking of our ancestors as wild, dull-witted barbarians (as we are urged to believe) but still adopt their rites, those rites will have no effect. After all, all such rites are founded on a knowledge of the Cosmos, of the designated purpose of the planets and on a knowledge of the power of mental energy; the power of thought. 
Even if we try harnessing the tremendous energy of our thought with the aid of their rites, we shall not obtain any positive results, since our thought will be contradicted by another thought of ours - namely that the Vedruss people were ignorant. 
Hence a paradox: you're an ignorant fool, but your acts are marvellous. The one excludes - or, at least, contradicts - the other. 
Perhaps the culture of our forebears is being deliberately concealed from us? After all, a bunch of ignorant and disoriented people cut off from their roots are easier to control. Perhaps this is God's retribution to our civilisation? Popular wisdom says "What you sow, that shall you reap.'" We have 
4Rus' (pron, ROOS) - the name of the East Slavic state of the first millennium of the Common Era (A. D.). See footnote 5 in Book 7, Chapter 12: 
"The ultimate taboo". 
5Compare Galatians 6: 7: " whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap" (Authorised King]ames Version). 
broken the ties with our forebears, and consequently the threads linking us with our children are also being broken. 
We can get another glimpse of the elevated culture of our pagan forebears in the question of conception of children by examining the traditions that are even today preserved in modern China and especially Japan, where a man and woman about to enter into intimate relations for the purposes of conceiving a child undergo a special rite of purification. The beliefs of Ancient China, Japan, India and Ancient Greece - and these are traditionally ancient pagan countries - lay tremendous emphasis on the matter of conception. 
So what, then, can anyone do who desires to bring forth good offspring? Should they first spend a lot of time studying the volumes of literature on this subject - besides spending a lot of time on studying treatises on choosing one's soulmate, and on the education of children? 
I can tell you right off: there's absolutely no need to waste part of one's own life on such study. I myself spent several years - not studying such sources, but simply familiarising myself with them, and I came to the sudden realisation that the Vedruss people have condensed all their monumental works into a system of simple, cheerful and rational rites covering all events of one's life. It gives the impression that God Himself helped them in formulating these rites, as well as in understanding the essence of Man's existence. 
Before attempting to apply the experience of our ancestors, we need to determine: which ancestors? I mean, how many years ago? And which territories of present-day Russia were settled by our forebears? 
As is known, history textbooks, including those written in Russian, tell about people's lives in Egypt and Rome of five thousand years ago. These countries have carried out (and are still carrying out) archseological excavations, which draw huge crowds of tourists every year. Russian history, on Conception involves more than flesh 
the other hand, if we take the word of even our own history books, covers a mere thousand-year period. 
That would mean our country's territory before that time was somehow home to a culturally backward people, or maybe there wasn't anybody there at all? Either that, or possibly somebody's been deliberately hiding our history from us? Indeed, they have. I have already written about this," but now I should like to present some archseological data. 
I shall tell you about Arkaim, a place which has a direct connection with the question of telegony. According to Anastasia's grandfather, it was there that three and a half thousand years ago a remarkable discovery was made. 
6See, for example, Book 6, Chapter f "The history of mankind, as told by Anastasia". 
CHAPTER SIX 
Into the depths of history 
Arkaim - Academy of the wise-men 
In 1952 satellites sent back to the Earth photographs of several unusual circles clearly delineated on the surface of the Southern Ural steppe. No one doubted that these circles had been artificially produced, though nobody could say exactly what they were. 
A debate was raging in both scientific and occult circles of the time as to where one should look for the original IndoEuropean homeland. Not without some justification scientists posited that the many European peoples, as well as those of India, Persia and part of Asia, could be traced back to a single source - a mystery people known as Pro to- IndoEuropeans. 
Many researchers have dreamt of finding the remains of the land where once lived the legendary White Aryan race. Researchers have been attempting to reach the fringes of the lost ancient and precious knowledge which the ancient Aryans possessed. 
When excavations began in the Arkaim Valley, archreologists announced to the academic world that an ancient city dating back more than forty centuries had been unearthed, and that it had been inhabited by people of the ancient IndoEuropean civilisation. The researchers started calling Arkaim' a city, a temple and an observatory, all at the same time. 
Whoever is interested in the academics' hypotheses can read about them in specialised literature on the subject. 
I shall pass on what Anastasia's grandfather told me about Arkaim. The logic of his thinking is much more accurate and intriguing than the logic underlying the scholars' scientific hypotheses. 
He stated right off: 
''Arkaim is not a city and not a temple. The part about the observatory is true, but that's not the main thing here. Arkaim is an academy - that's what it would be called today. It was in Arkaim that the teachers of the wise-men lived and worked. Here they engaged in research on the Universe; they also determined the interrelationship of celestial bodies and their influence on Man. Their tremendous discoveries were never recorded, nor did they make long speeches in public. Through their many years of research they worked out the rites, presented them to the people and subsequently kept track of how effective they were. They made corrections as required. They were able to sum up their lengthy researches in a brief word or two which signified the substance of their discovery. 
"For example, there are some very early rites, such as the Saviour of the Honey' 64 July) and the Saviour of the Apple' 
IArkaim (pron. ar-ka-EEM) - located in the Chelyabinsk Oblast of Russia, near the border of Kazakhstan. For further information on Arkaim, see: 
Genadii B. Zdanovich, 'Arkaim Archaeological Park: a cultural-ecological reserve in Russia", Chapter 20 in: Peter G. Stone & Philippe G. Plane!, The constructed past: experimental archeology, education and the public (Oxford & New York: Routledge, 1999), pp. 283-291. 
2Saviour of the Honey Feast Day (Russian: Miodovy Spas) - a Russian Orthodox Church holiday (actually celebrated 14 August) to mark the beginning of the Assumption Fast. New gatherings of honey are brought to churches on that day for blessing before sharing with parishioners. 
Saviour of the Apple Feast Day (Russian: Yablochny Spas) - a Church holiday coinciding with Transfiguration Day, celebrated at the mid-point of the Assumption Fast (actually 19 August). On this day farmers take grapes to the churches - or, in their place, apples from the new crop. 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
(19 July). People did not use any new-crop apples until the Saviour of the Apple feast, or any new gatherings of honey until the Honey feast. 
"Through their lengthy researches and observations the wise-men discovered that up until this date the apple does not give any significant benefit to Man, even if it is ripe. And this goes far beyond just the apple. Many berries, edible herbs and root vegetables beneficial to Man ripen before the Apple feast. If Man began to eat apples too soon, he would not have room left for the produce that was more beneficial to him at this very time. 
"It was these wise-men who discovered that the particular sequence of fruit and vegetable ripening in Nature is no mere coincidence. It is this very sequence that constitutes Man's divine dietary regime, which the science of the centuries to follow would be searching for in vain. 
"Volumes of treatises could be written about how they conducted their research. The wise-men, however, never compiled any; and did not burden people with the task of reading them. They imparted their conclusions to people - in readymade form - in just a few words. And people believed the wise-men. Their advice invariably proved true in life. 
"Besides, there is no comparison between the Vedruss wisemen and their counterparts in Greece, the Egyptian priests or today's acclaimed academic lights. The Vedruss wise-men never received any honours or rewards for their remarkable discoveries. They could not accumulate wealth or power that, say; the Egyptian priests enjoyed. And they were not given the kind of adoration showered upon many in church hierarchies today. The only thing a wise-man could expect upon arriving at a certain settlement was food and any replacement clothing or footwear he might need, as well as a place where he could lay his head, though some wise-men might decline the offer of shelter in favour of sleeping under the stars, in the open air. 
"Beyond that he enjoyed the people's sincere, unfeigned respect. Over the centuries such an arrangement ensured the selection of only the best teachers and thinkers among the people. 
"The receptive populace also showed their gratitude by building, according to the wise-men's own designs, complexes like Arkaim where the wise-men could retreat for meditation and a mutual sharing of thoughts. Here they would tell each other of their discoveries and describe the rites they had come up with based on their discoveries. It was something on the order of a supreme academic council. 
"Most of the time ordinary people didn't even know who was behind any given rite, or whom they had to thank for a particularly insightful and effective rite. 
"There was one wise-man, for example - an acclaimed philosopher, astronomer and psychologist - who devoted ninety years to the study of how to combat the phenomenon we know today as telegony. 
"He discovered a cure and offered people an effective remedy; consisting of a rite of only fifteen minutes in duration. True, the preparation for the rite took a lot longer. Why don't you ask Anastasia, Vladimir - she might tell you about it. 
"Only I'll say right off: this rite can be felt only through an understanding of the feelings of love possessed by our distant ancestors, the philosophy of their love. The further back you manage to go with your thought, the more you'll be able to make sense of the rite." 
To be more thoroughly persuaded of the truth of what Anastasia's grandfather has said regarding Arkaim, let us take a look at its architecture. 
Arkaim has the form of a circle with an exterior diameter of approximately 160 metres. As you can see, that's rather small for a city. But I shall still call it a city; as scholars at the moment are doing. 
It is surrounded by a two-metre-wide perimeter trench, outside a massive exterior wall. The wall was five and a half metres high and five metres thick. There were four entrances in the wall, the largest facing south-west; the other three were smaller, located on opposite sides." 
All the entrances led directly into the only ring road, about five metres wide, which separated the dwellings attached to the outer wall from the inner ring of walls. 
This ring road was covered with logs, under which, for the whole length of the street, ran a dug-out two-metre-wide ditch, which connected with the perimeter trench. Thus the city had its own storm-drainage system: surplus water would seep through the logs into the ditch and eventually into the perimeter trench. 
All the dwellings attached to the outer wall, like lemon sections, had doorways on the main street. No more than thirtyfive dwellings were discovered around the outer circle. That's not much, even for a village. 
Next we see the mysterious ring of the inner wall, which was even more massive than the outer one. Three metres thick, it reached a height of seven metres. 
According to the excavation findings, there was no entrance through this wall except for a small passageway at the south-east point. Hence, another twenty-five interior dwellings, identical to those around the outer perimeter wall, were practically cut off from everything by the thick, high inner wall. In order to reach the little passageway to the inner ring, one had to travel the whole length of the ring road. This had a hidden significance. Anyone entering the city had to travel the same path as the Sun. 
Finally, Arkaim was 'crowned' by a central plaza almost square in shape, approximately 25 by 27 metres. 
"opposite sides - i.e., north-east, north-west and south-east. 
Judging by the traces of fires spread out in a particular pattern, this plaza was used for some kind of rites. 
Thus we see the schematic figure of a Mandala - a square inside a circle. In ancient cosmogenic' texts the circle symbolises the Universe, the square - the Earth, our material world. Ancient men of wisdom, who had a perfect knowledge of the structure of the Cosmos, saw how naturally and harmoniously it was constructed. And so in building a city; it was like re-creating the Universe in miniature. 
Arkaim was built according to a pre-determined plan as a single complex whole, oriented with extreme precision to celestial bodies. The design resulting from the four entrances in Arkaim's outer wall forms a 'right-facing' swastika, reflecting the clockwise movement of the Sun.6 
The swastika (in Sanskrit, 'connected with good', 'the best success') is one of the most ancient sacred symbols. It is encountered as far back as the Upper Paleolithic period? in the cultures of many of the world's peoples - including those of India, Ancient Rus', China and Egypt, as well as of the mysterious Mayan people in Central America, to name but a few. The swastika may be seen in old Orthodox icons. It is the symbol of the Sun, success, happiness and creativity. Correspondingly; a backwards ('left-facing') swastika symbolises darkness and destruction - the 'night-time Sun' of the dwellers of ancient Rus'. 
Both swastikas were used, as may be seen on ancient ornaments - in particular, on the Aryan jars found around 
cosmogenic relating to cosmogony, the astrophysical study (or a theory or model) of the origin and evolution of the Universe. 
clockwise movement of the Sun that is, as seen from the Northern Hemisphere. 7Upper Paleolithic period - a period of between 40, 000 and TO, OOO years ago (also known as the late Stone Age, particularly in reference to Africa), before the advent of agriculture. 
Arkaim. This has a deep significance. Day takes the place of night, light the place of darkness, and a new birth takes the place of death - and this is the natural order of things in the Universe. Hence in antiquity there was no such thing as a 'good' or 'bad' swastika - they were perceived as a unified entity (like the energy of yin and yanl in the Orient). 
Arkaim was outwardly beautiful: the ideal circular city marked by distinctive gate-towers, burning torches and a beautifully formed facade - probably featuring some kind of meaningful sacral pattern. Everything in Arkaim, after all, was fraught with meaning. 
Each dwelling was attached on one side to either the outer or inner wall, and faced either the main ring road or the central plaza. In the improvised 'entrance-hall' to each dwelling was a special watercourse, which emptied into the ditch under the main street. The ancient Aryans were thus provided with a sewer system. Not only that, but each dwelling had its own well, furnace and a small cupola-shaped storage area. 
From each well, above the water-level, two earthen pipes branched out. One led to the furnace, the other to the storage area. What for? Quite brilliant, actually. We all know that if you glance down a well, you will invariably feel a current of cool air. So, in the Aryan furnaces this cool air, passing through an earthen pipe, created such a strong draft that it was capable of melting bronze with no need for bellows. There was a furnace like that in every dwelling, and all the ancient blacksmiths had to do was to perfect their craft and compete with their artistic rivals! The other earthen pipe leading to the storage area ensured a lower temperature there. 
8yin, yang - the two opposite (though complementary) principles of Chinese philosophy (see footnote 2 in Book 7, Chapter 23: "Significant books"). 
The famous Russian astroarchseologist Konstantin Konstantinovich Bystrushkin researched Arkaim as an astronomical observatory and came to the following conclusion: 
Arkaim is not just a complex installation, but it is subtle in its complexity. In examining its schematics, one can easily see parallels with the well-known Stonehenge monument in England. For example, the diameter of the inner circle of Arkaim is always reported as being exactly 85 metres. In fact, it is a circle with two radiuses - 40 metres and 43.2 metres. (Try drawing itl) Compare that to the radius of Stonehenge's Aubrey Hole ring.? which is also 43.2 metres! Stonehenge andArkaim are positioned at approximately the same latitude, and both are at the centre of a bowl-shaped valley. The distance between them is almost 4, 000 km... 
Researchers have determined that on the basis of all the known facts, Arkaim amounts to a horizon observatory. Why a 'horizon' observatory, specifically? Because the measurings and observations made there are based on the moment of the rising and setting of the Sun and the Moon on the horizon. The recording of the moment of 'disengagement' (or 'touchdown') of the lower edge of the disc on the horizon allows the accurate determination of the place of this event. If we keep track of sunrises on a daily basis, we shall note that the actual point of sunrise shifts from day to day. Reaching its northern limit on 22 June, this point then moves south to its opposite apogee on 22 December. This is part of the cosmic order. 
That means there are four visible points of observation of the Sun each year - two points of sunrise (on 22 June and 
Aubrey Hole ring - a ring of 56 pits ('holes') thought to have held posts forming a timber circle named after the poet and antiquary John Aubrey (r626-r697) who discovered them in the seventeenth century. 
December) and two corresponding points of sunset on the western horizon. Add to these two more points - namely, sunrise and sunset during the equinox (22 March and 22 September). This offered a sufficiently accurate determination of the length of a year. However a year is made up of a whole host of singular events, and these can be determined with the aid of that other celestial body, namely, the Moon. Regardless of the complexity involved in its observation, people of old knew the laws of its movement across the empyrean. Here are a few of them: 
(1) The full moon which occurs closest to 22 June is observed at the point of the winter solstice (22 December) and vice-versa. 
(2) Lunar events can be observed near the points of the solstice on a nineteen-year cycle ('high' and 'low' Moon). 
As an observatory, Arkaim allowed astronomers to follow the events of the Moon. It is possible to note eighteen astronomical events just on these huge circular walls alone! Six of them are connected with the Sun and twelve with the Moon (including the 'high' and 'low' Moon). By comparison, researchers at Stonehenge were able to identify only fifteen cosmic events. 
In addition to information about these amazing factual events, the following data were obtained: the Arkaim unit of measurement of length is 80 cm. The centre of the inner circle shows a displacement from the centre of the outer circle by a factor of 5.25 Arkaim units, which is close to the Moon's orbital inclination: 5°9' plus or minus 10 minutes. In Bystrushkin's opinion, this reflects the correlation between the orbits of the Moon and the Sun (for the terrestrial observer). Correspondingly, Arkaim's outer circle is dedicated to the Moon, its inner circle to the Sun. Not only that, but astroarchreological measurements have shown a link between some of Arkaim's parameters and the wobbling of the Earth's 
axis - this is getting into some pretty sophisticated science, even in terms of modern astronomy 
And so we see that by any stretch of the imagination Arkaim hardly falls under the category of 'city'. 
Its extremely small rooms offer no accommodation for families, but serve as an ideal space for philosophical reflections. Historians know that in ancient times so-called 'wise-men' were considered to be scientists and teachers. Consequently, it is possible that Arkaim, as one of the most celebrated scientific centres, could have belonged exclusively to these 'wise-men'. There were simply no other scientists around in those times. 
It is also known that the wise-men devised and adjusted their rites on the basis of their knowledge of the Cosmos. 
The question is: what has become of these unique rites today? What kind of obscurantism has destroyed them or is concealing them from people's view? 
What is the message of Sungir? 
And now I should like to bring to your attention some even more sensational news, eclipsing that of even the pyramids of Egypt or the ruins of Ancient Rome. 
This information is also needed, as Anastasia's grandfather said, in order to better understand the phenomena and knowledge of the Universe prevalent in our ancient forebears' time. And for that we have to delve as deeply as possible into history 
The Siberian recluse said, furthermore: 
"If your thought can dig down to three thousand years ago, you will begin to gradually feel the knowledge of three millennia. If it can go as deep as five thousand years, then five millennia, though not everything you discover will be comprehensible to you. You actually need a minimum of nineteen thousand years." 
This attempt to dig into our country's historical past seemed to me utterly unfeasible. I was already prepared to go off to India or Tibet where, it is said, one can learn more about our ancestors than here at home. But, as it turned out, there was no need to go anywhere. Everything was available right here, and now I invite everyone reading these lines to cast his thought about our forebears more than nineteen thousand years back in time. 
The archreological finds I am about to describe were made (by mere chance) on the outskirts of the city ofVladimir, which, according to official sources, is approximately 1, 015 years old. 
In 1955, while excavating a clay pit mine for the Vladimir Ceramics Factory; Alexander F. Nacharov discovered in one of the buckets the bones of some very large animal, which had been resting at a depth of three metres. Archeeologists were informed about the discovery. 
The first excavations thereafter simply astounded the scientists. Buried on the site were the remains of people, jewellery; clothing ornamentation and everyday objects, all testifying to some kind of ancient culture. Further investigation confirmed that our ancestors had arrived on the banks of the Klyazma River'? as early as the Old Stone Age, approximately 25, 000 years ago. 
IOKlyazma River - a tributary of the Oka, which in turn flows into the Volga at Nizhny Novgorod east of Moscow: Vladimir is one of the major cities on the banks of the Klyazma. 
Now somebody could be wondering whether they might have run about on all fours, dressed in home-made skins and carrying clubs! Not at all. The scientists were amazed by another finding. 
On the skeletons themselves or close by were a whole lot of jewellery and ornaments which aided in reconstructing the appearance of the clothing worn by these ancient people - something similar to either overalls or a perfectly civilised dress. 
The finding is such that if we are not going to relegate these remains to the category of buried extra-terrestrials, then we shall have to completely revise our whole historical outlook on the world. 
In one of its halls the Vladimir State Museum of History and Ethnography mounted a special exhibition dedicated to these unique findings. It put out a booklet stating that the Sungir site is the most interesting archseological monument in Russia, and is known to archaeologists the world over. It has hosted a number of international scientific conferences. 
Sungir represents one of the northernmost settlements of Ancient Man in the Vladimir Region on the Great Russian Plain. In terms of richness of both objects and state of preservation of such ancient remains, it has no compeer anywhere in the world. 
Thanks to the collaborative efforts of archeeologists, geologists, paleontologists and paleobotanists, we have a fairly clear picture of how people lived back then, in this incredibly distant time-period. 
Here, on the edge of a glacier, was where the tundra used to begin, dotted here and there with islands of fir, pine, birch and alder groves. The animal world was quite diversified. 
According to the booklet, "ancient Sungirians hunted the reindeer, wild horse, Arctic fox, wolverine, bison, brown bear, wolf, Arctic hare; they also went after the black grouse, junglefowl and herring gull. And of course, they hunted the 
mammoth - a huge animal, now extinct, almost four metres tall and weighing six tonnes. This represented for them a much sought-after trophy: meat, skins (indispensable in constructing dwellings) and tusks (a solid and superb material for the preparation of both weapons and ornaments." 
The inventory of objects made from bone and horn is most interesting: shaft adjusters, hoes, spearheads, arrowheads and beads from mammoth tusks, jewellery made from the fangs of the Arctic fox. A small silhouetted figure of a large-headed horse came to be recognised as a rare example of primi tive art. This famous Sungir horse was decorated with tiny dotted ornaments and red ochre. The number of dots on the figure - a multiple of five - testifies to the use of a quinary counting system among inhabitants of the site. A seven-based system points to the knowledge possessed by people living 25, 000 years ago. But it is the unique burial sites of these ancient people that have brought global fame to Sungir. 
In 1964, in a heavy layer of ochre-coloured rock, was found the skull of a woman; lower still were the remains of an elderly man. On his chest was a pendant made from a pebble, while on his arms were twenty-five plate bracelets made from mammoth tusks. In addition, on the skull, all along the arms, legs and torso almost 3, 500 beads were arranged in rows. The pattern of their arrangement on the skeleton allowed scientists to reconstruct the embroidered costume of this ancient Sungirian. It was reminiscent of the fur clothing worn by Arctic peoples today. At the bottom of the shallow grave they discovered a knife and some kind of scraper made of flint. 
Just as much a treasure was the next burial site, unearthed some five years later. 
This grave contained the remains of an adult body; but without a skull. Beside it lay a necklace of mammoth-tusk beads, a ring and a pair of reindeer antlers. But farther back, at 65 em below the upper grave, were found two skeletons of children. 
A boy of twelve or thirteen and a girl between seven and nine had been placed in the grave in a stretched position, their heads pressed tightly against each other. Children on their way to 'the next world' were accompanied by hunting weapons made from mammoth tusks: eleven darts, 3 daggers and two spears made out of split and straightened tusks, one 2.5 metres and the other 1.5 metres long. The grave also yielded mammoth-tusk 'rods', very expressive figurines of a horse and a mammoth, carved discs of an apparently ceremonial nature and connected with the worship of the Sun and the Moon. The children's clothing, too, was embroidered with thousands of little beads, and fastened across the chest with pins made of bones. The back of the costume had been outfitted with threads of beads in the shape of animal tails. 
This finding testifies to the complex rite of burial and the developed religious beliefs of the ancient people of the Stone Age. One may confidently assume that they believed in the afterlife. 
Multidisciplinary archeeological investigations have been going on at Sungir, with a few interruptions, ever since 1956. For almost twenty years the project was under the supervision of the famous archseologist Dr Otto Nikolaevich Bader. II Anthropologist M. M. Gerasimov;" along with his students 
"Otto Nikolaevich Bader (I903-I979) - an internationally recognised archseologist of Soviet Russia, accorded membership in the Italian Institute of Prehistory and the Society of Prehisroric Archreology in France. As early as I924 he was appointed head of the Archseological Division of Moscow's Central Industrial District Museum, and, in I93I, Academic Secretary of Moscow State University's Institute and Museum of Anthropology He went on to hold a number of other prominent positions in Russian academe. 
12}'; Iikhail Mikhailovich Gerasimou (I907-I970) - a prominent Soviet anthropologist, archaeologist and sculptor, who specialised in the re-creation of the outward appearance of a human being on the basis of skeletal remains. He has created reconstructed portraits of historical figures such as Yaroslav the Wise, Tamerlaine, Ivan the Terrible and Schiller. 
G. V Lebedinskaya" and T. S. Surnina succeeded in reconstructing the external appearance of the ancient Sungirians. 
As is known, anthropologists are often able to reconstruct a person's face with sufficient accuracy on the basis of the skull. This offered a rare opportunity indeed to gaze upon the faces of ancient people - an opportunity I decided to take advantage of A wise, intelligent-looking face on the adult male. A slightly sad expression on the young girl's face, a thoughtful one on the boy's. 
And yet the presumptions about hunting, and especially the mammoth, I believe, were not entirely accurate. 
I brought Anastasia's grandfather to this unique exhibition in the Vladimir museum. The old fellow slowly made his way around the displays, without stopping at any of them. Then he stood in the middle of the hall and bowed four times, each time shifting his position by ninety degrees. When I told him about the scientists' conclusions, he began to refute a good deal of it, explaining: 
"These people, Vladimir, never hunted mammoths. 
Mammoths were their household animals, and a very great help to families, also a way of transporting heavy loads. They performed a greater variety of tasks than elephants do today in India, which are controlled by mahouts, or drivers. 
"Standing on a mammoth, the Sungirians could gather fruit from very tall trees and store them in woven bags and baskets, and then carry them to wherever they liked. 
"In the domain glades, the mammoths cleared out young underbrush from the forest encroaching on the glades or, depending on the task assigned, would shake and then pull 
Galina Viacheslavovna Lebedinseaya (r 924-) - a specialist in remains reconstruction. Following Gerasimov's death in 1970, she succeeded him as head of the Waxed Reconstruction Laboratory at the Ethnographical Institute of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. 
up trees so as to enlarge the glade. Whenever people had to move from one place to another, they would load their belongings, utensils and food supplies onto the mammoth. 
"This was a very kind and industrious household animal. 
Even a small child could put his fingers around the end of its trunk and lead it about at will. Indeed, children often played with the mammoth, making it suck up water into its trunk and then give them a shower. The mammoth took great pleasure in watching how the youngsters jumped and squealed with joy. 
"The mammoth was especially delighted, too, when his wool was combed out and removed by a special, rake-like instrument. A Man would wash the wool, dry it and then use it for his own purposes, for example, in making a bed. 
"There was absolutely no need for these people to hunt the mammoth. This can be deduced just from the information available in the booklet, which contains quite a few contradictory statements." 
"Why contradictory?" 
"Think about it. They list all sorts of wild game which could easily be caught in sufficient numbers with the aid of special traps. If a Man killed a mammoth, which weighs six tonnes, he could not possibly eat all its meat right off" 
"But what if there were a whole lot of people?" 
"There couldn't have been that many. Back in those times people didn't live packed tight together the way they do now in cities or towns. Each family tribe had its own lands. Each family had their own territory, their own home. On an area of three square kilometres might be living fewer than a hundred people. Even collectively, they couldn't eat a six-tonne mammoth in just a few days, even if they didn't consume anything but meat during that time. The rotting meat would start to decompose and attract a huge number of insects. It could have started an epidemic." 
"But maybe they invited people from other territories to some kind of feast?" 
"What sense would there be in travelling several kilometres just to eat meat which there was enough of at home?" 
"But if you say the mammoth's decomposing carcass could run the risk of provoking an epidemic, the very same threat could be posed by a household mammoth when it died." 
"Vladimir, a mammoth would never die in the family surroundings. When it got old and felt death approaching, it would walk a little ways from the house and trumpet three times, before heading off to a cemetery for mammoths, where it died. You should have known that yourself, as that is what wild elephants do in India today. Before they die they trumpet and then leave the herd." 
"So that means we have a very distorted understanding of how the ancient people fed themselves?" 
"Yes, that's right. Perhaps it's an attempt to justify your current barbarity in regard to the treatment of animals. The farther you go back into history, the fewer people you'll encounter eating meat. They had a sufficient supply of growing things to sustain themselves. As for animals, they took from them only what the animals themselves gave to Man milk and eggs, for example. Meat could have been harmful to the stomachs of the first people. 
': Another argument in favour of the premise that hunting was not a basic source of food for primitive people is its illogicality by comparison with other ways of obtaining food." 
"What other ways?"
"From tamed, domesticated animals. Picture to yourself a Man whose household includes a female mammoth, a cow and a goat, all of which can be milked, yielding a daily supply of top-quality fresh produce. This Man's household also includes domesticated fowl: a goose, a duck, a chicken, all of which provide eggs with little effort on his part. He has the 
Into the depths of history 
opportunity of gathering honey and pollen from bees, and a great many root vegetables and edible herbs are also at hand. 
"Then all of a sudden it appears as though the Man is going out of his mind. He kills all his domestic animals - which, apart from everything else, have also been guarding him when he is asleep - eats them and begins hunting for wild game, thereby putting himself in danger without guaranteeing himself and his family a regular supply of fresh produce. 
"In place of friendly surroundings and the love expressed to him by his household animals, he ends up with nothing but an aggressive environment in which it is virtually impossible, one might say, for his household to survive." 
"But did the first people really begin right off to domesticate and train their animals? Maybe that came along at a later period?" 
"There would have been no later period for Man if he had taken an aggressive stance from the start. You must be acquainted, after all, Vladimir, with situations where an infant alone in the forest may be fed even by carnivorous wolves - the very same forest where a pack of wolves could tear an adult to pieces. What would account for the discrepancy in their attitude toward Man?" 
"I really can't say." 
"Because in the first instance the infant Man has no aggression, while in the second we have aggression and fear which create unease in the surrounding environment. 
"The first people had no sense of fear or aggression. It was love that was dominant in them, along with a genuine interest in the world around them. Consequently, it was no effort to domesticate or train animals and birds. Their primary concern was to determine the purpose of every creature they encountered on the Earth. This they did. As far as the animals go, you already know that they find their own highest benefit in Man's feelings oflove and care for them. 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
"Meat was first consumed by a less-than-complete Man, one drained of the energy of Love. It seems that he either went out of his mind or was infected with the most terrible disease - a disease which has come down to the present day." 
"But what connection can there be between love and Man's first consumption of meat?" 
"There is a direct connection. A Man living in love is incapable of killing." 
"Possibly. But can you determine why these children died 25, 000 years ago? Why were they buried in such an unusual manner, head to head like that?" 
"I could tell you, of course, but it would be a very long story. Besides, it is not important for you to know why they were overcome by death, but for what purpose." 
"For what purpose?" 
"There you go again, Vladimir, constantly asking questions. Too lazy to think for yourself Only don't blame me for speaking like this, the way you did back in the taiga when you let resentment take over. Think, instead, on the whole point of my telling you things. What I say will bring you more harm than good if you don't begin to think for yourself 
"I speak, and you listen, and instead of working out your own conclusions in your thought, you are merely taking note of mine. You have set yourself up a goal of finding conditions in the past under which love could remain with people forever, and then reintroducing them in this present day. That's fine, the path is correct, and the goal is the most important of all. 
"You are trying to determine how many ages ago love began to dwell with people. Look: here is a date right before your eyes. Think about it. Right in front of you lie two child skeletons. Their death at such a young age is meaningless unless people can realise what important information is concealed in their burial. 
"Their death will acquire meaning if you retrieve this information right now." 
I didn't resent the old fellow for his remark on my laziness of mind. I had long realised that he was using some kind of methods of his own, trying again and again to teach me how to control my thoughts by alternative means. But I, after all, did not go through the same school as they, training their thought from childhood. I went to an ordinary school, which quite possibly serves to do just the opposite - to switch thought off 
So here I am standing in front of these child skeletons, straining myself mentally, without being able to grasp how I can look on them and learn at least something about the love that existed 25, 000 years ago - if it existed at all at that time. 
"It did exist," the old fellow suddenly said. 
"What made you decide that? There's not a word about love on the museum signs." 
"Not a word, but so what? Look carefully. Judging by the skeletons, these are children. The boy is twelve and a half The girl, she's eight. 
"On their skeletons are hundreds of bone beads. On the basis of their arrangement your scientists have determined what kind of clothing the children were wearing. But is that all the bone beads can tell us?" 
"What else can they tell us?" 
"That their parents, Vladimir, loved these children very much. They loved their children and they loved each other. Only loving parents could get involved in such time-consuming ornamentation of their children's clothing. We can also tell that they had more than enough free time for artistic pursuits and for designing and then making fine clothing. 
"Note that the objects found in the grave include absolutely no weapons capable of killing." 
"What about the darts? Aren't those weapons?" 
"Of course not. And they're not even harpoons for catching fish, since there are no barbs on the ends. The end of the object they've called a 'dart' is not even sharp. A thin, lightweight dart like that could hardly kill or even wound any creature." 
"Then what was this object used for?" 
"For training and controlling animals. See how it resembles a stick animal trainers use today? Elephant drivers, for example, use sticks like that to control their charges." 
"But why did they need to make them out of bone? They could have also taken a real stick and not wasted time straightening out the bone and putting ornaments onto it." 
''A. wooden stick couldn't last very long. Animals, on the other hand, get accustomed to a single object - its shape and even the smell it acquires from contact with the master's hand." 
"Right, then - everything you say sounds rather convincing, but there are other objects which resemble arrowheads. And arrows were meant for killing." 
"In the case of these specific people, who were not of the very earliest period of human life on the Earth, arrows were intended for scaring away carnivorous beasts when they attacked. 
"There are also some objects that look like hoes. These, indeed, were instruments for planting seeds and digging up roots." 
"But the jewellery? Look, this necklace is made from the fangs of an Arctic fox. And scientists assume that the clothing was made from leather. So, they killed animals after all!" 
"Your scientists are right about their clothing being made of leather, but there was absolutely no need to kill any animals for this purpose. There were reptiles which shed their old skin on a regular basis. Reptiles might die for some reason, and then ants would eat out their insides, leaving the skin untouched, which turned out to be very useful for making clothing. Given 
such circumstances, it would be silly to waste time on killing an animal, cutting up the carcass, processing and drying the skin or softening it. What for? Since it was possible to acquire a ready-made skin in an ideal condition. In the Divine Nature all Man's needs have been provided for in advance. As for the necklace from a fox's fangs, it was a lot simpler to take them from a skeleton already worked over and dried by Nature." 
At this point I'm going to interrupt, for a moment, Anastasia's grandfather's account about the archreologists' unique findings. 
In the booklet put out by the Vladimir State Museum there are drawings showing two exhibit halls - the Sungir Architectural Park and the Sungir Museum Complex. It mentions that international conferences have been organised around these unique findings. 
However, I would not advise any great haste to visit the excavation site of this ancient civilisation. There are no actual pavilions on the site - only the remains of unfinished construction. And the archreological work is not proceeding at any intensive pace. The State has no funds for such important projects. They are going ahead, one might say; thanks to the level of enthusiasm both of the scientists involved and of the local authorities. 
I arrived at this unique place on a weekend. In one of the pits I saw two men taking soil samples from the side of the pit and carefully placing them into plastic bags. They turned out to be workers from the State Archreological Institute. They confirmed that Sungir is considered the richest archseological site for the study of Ancient Man anywhere in the world. 
The Vladimir Museum exhibition is the only one of its kind in Russia. They said that tourists sometimes visited the Sungir excavation site, but mainly tourists from Japan, since there is an even fuller exhibition on Sungir at the Tokyo National Archseological Museum. 
It seemed pretty strange that the people in the Land of the Rising Sun show more respect to our ancient forebears living on our country's territory than we do ourselves. Thankyou, Japanese friends, for protecting the culture of our joint forebears. 
We talk about Russia's lofty mission, about spirituality and the need to support the national image, but what support can we talk about if foreign tourists see our relationship to history through their own eyes? 
Well, the only thing we can do is hope that possibly our more civilised descendants will learn what secrets still remain to be discovered in Sungir. 
I managed to find out that 25, 000 years ago our forebears were civilised people, who knew how to love passionately and preserve love forever. 
A family-centred society" 
To all appearances, in order to bring back lost effective traditions and rites capable of preserving love in families, it would seem necessary to obtain full information about the life of our forebears. 
To this end we must delve even deeper into our historical past, right down to the family-community-centred society; 
14Here and throughout this section of the chapter, the Russian term for [amzly is rod/ rodouoi, which refers not just to the family in any particular moment of time, but rather to the tribe, clan orfamily line, which includes all forebears in addition to the present generation and all future descendants. See also footnote 7 in Book 4, Chapter 33: "School, or the lessons of the gods". 
when a husband and wife who loved each other created a friendly family community together with their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
In to day's world a husband and wife simply cannot hold on to even their closest relatives - their children. No sooner do their offspring approach adulthood than they try to get out from under their parents' wing. They go off to live in a university residence, or rent an apartment - often at considerable expense, but they still go. 
And we're not just talking about children! Many couples separate even before children come along, or shortly after their appearance. 
The family-community-centred society existed many millennia in Rus' before the princes came along. It was characterised by an absence of divorce and stronger family units, in comparison with subsequent social structures in our history. Only genuine love is capable of starting a family line. In the past it was much easier for grown children to leave the family than today. I'm talking about the early period in Rus', before the arrival of the princes. 
If two young people who loved each other weren't happy with their relationships with their parents, they could leave home and set up their own dwelling on whatever territory they took a fancy to. They could start by nourishing themselves on what they found in the forest; then they would till the ground and establish a household. But they didn't go away. That means the founders of the family line treated them with understanding and love. 
We need to study this period and from it draw into our modern way of life grains of logic capable of helping build strong families today. 
But how, by what means can we access information about this era in people's lives, when Russian history describes only the Christian period? 
Another factor necessitating an investigation into our people's historical past is the importance of determining whether the ancient rites and culture disappeared all by themselves, having outlived their usefulness, or whether the traditions of many millennia were deliberately destroyed. 
If they disappeared all on their own, then there is no point in digging into the historical past, since the people themselves rejected their ancient culture, not seeing it as useful, which means it would not be accepted today either. 
If, on the other hand, the ancient traditions were deliberately destroyed, then we must look into the question of by whom and for what purpose. We must seek them out, find them and present them to society for evaluation. 
It is possible the ancient rites and traditions conceal within themselves such important secrets of human existence that without uncovering them we shall continue to move toward an abyss, die out and torment ourselves with family strife. We often talk about large-scale wars. Family conflict, however, is often more painful for each of its participants than news about war in Iraq or events in Israel. 
Recalling everything I knew about Ancient Russian history, I decided that, strange as it might seem at first glance, the only thread leading through the vast labyrinth of historical falsehoods was the conqueror Genghis Khan" - in other words, the three-hundred-year period of the so-called 'TataroMongol Yoke' in Rus'. Why? Because this period began shortly after the Christianisation ofRus', when the traditions of our ancestors had not yet been completely annihilated. 
15Genghis Khan (Mongolian: Chinggis Khayan; real name: Temujin, n62- 1227) the founder, reformer and unifier of the State of Mongolia (1206). After uniting the nomadic tribes of north-east and central Asia, he organised campaigns of conquest throughout Asia and Eastern Europe, thus forming the largest contiguous empire in world history: 
Not only that, but Genghis Khan was just about the brightest, most interesting and enlightened personality of his time. It is not only that he and his descendants conquered half the world, but it is fascinating to see how they did it. 
I can tell you right off that their army played only a secondary role in this process. We know from various historical sources that Genghis Khan sent expeditions to many lands, as far away as China and India, which supplied him with wisemen. He spent a great deal of time conversing with men of wisdom. He was attempting to determine the purpose of human existence on the Earth, and to find immortality. In other words, he was gathering the wisdom of various peoples and could well have possessed information about the social structure of Ancient Rus'. 
And it turned out, in fact, that he did. I am convinced that it was thanks to this information that his family, his sons and great-grandchildren were able to hold the so-called elite of many countries in subjection over the centuries. And I mean exactly that - it wasn't countries or their peoples that he held in subjection, but their elites that were usurping the peoples of these countries. 
Somebody might wonder what on earth the knowledge of ancient family traditions and love-preserving rites has to do with the successful subjugation of states. 
You shouldn't be surprised - there is a simple direct relationship, and such knowledge is more powerful than millions of soldiers' swords or even the most state-of-the-art weaponry. 
I shall not bother describing the whole three-hundred-year period of the Tataro-Mongolian hold on Rus'. I shall cite just one episode - albeit a very typical and interesting episode - the subjugation of the Vladimir-Suzdal principality, on which I have collected information from various sources. Let's try to arrive at some conclusions together. 
A mysterious manoeuvre 
Chronicles, modern historical sources and church literature all talk about a mysterious and even secretive manoeuvre on the part of Batu Khan'6, grandson to Genghis Khan, on the outskirts of the city of Vladimir in 1238. What is the mystery here? This is how the chronicles tell it: 
"Having taken Riazan" in 1237, in the spring of 1238 Batu Khan and his cavalry pushed their way into the city of Suzdal... " As subsequently reported in a multitude of ecclesiastical sources, he burnt Suzdal, exterminated part of the population and took the remaining part captive. A lot is said in these sources about the "atrocities committed against the people". 
Secular historians, on the other hand, describe the situation more accurately and impartially. Thus, for example, in the materials available in the Vladimir-Suzdal State Museum the event is described as follows: 
16Batu Khan (also known as Baty, 12°5-1255) - the son ofJochi and grandson of Genghis Khan, who inherited the leadership of the so-called Golden Horde (Mongolian: Altan Ordyn Uls; Russian: Zolotaya Orda) - part of the Mongol Empire that covered much of present-day Russian territory (along with Ukraine, Kazakhstan and the Caucasus) for almost three centuries, beginning in the 1240s. 
17Riclzan - a city on the Oka River south-east of Moscow (see footnote 6 in Book 5, Chapter 17: "Questions and answers"). 
The Tatars set up their camps at the city of Vladimir, while they themselves went and took Suzdal, and plundered the Holy Mother of God (cathedral), and burnt the prince's court, and burnt the monastery of Saint Dmitry, and plundered others; and the old monks and nuns, and the priests, and the blind, and the lame, and the deaf, and the labourweary and all other people were slaughtered, while the young monks, and monks, and priests, and their wives, and the deacons with their wives, and their daughters, and their sons - all these were led away to the Tatars' camps, and they themselves went to Vladimir. 
As we can see, Batu Khan did not take anywhere near the whole population captive. And he killed off the old highranking monks and took the young ones captive. He didn't burn and plunder the whole city; but only the prince's residence along with Suzdal's churches and monasteries. 
And now let us try to solve a superhistorical mystery. Why (as the document says) did the Tatars "set up their camps at the city of Vladimir, while they themselves went and took Suzdal"? 
Any military historian - as, indeed, any modern army commander - will tell you that this manoeuvre completely goes against standard military tactics. 
To establish a camp under the walls of a major fortified city and then leave it and move one's troops to a smaller target - that is tantamount to suicide. 
The distance between the cities of Vladimir and Suzdal at the time was equivalent to 35 kilometres. With the roads rendered impassable by the spring rains, it was a good day's journey on horseback. 
The taking of Suzdal required a minimum of several more days, and then a day's journey back. 
It wouldn't have taken any more than a day for the soldiers defending Vladimir to go out of their fortified city on a foray 
and rout the defenceless enemy camp. All they had to do was seize the spare horses, the spare quivers of arrows, the supplies, the wall-storming ladders and stone-throwing devices, and they would have shorn the enemy not only of the possibility of launching an attack on them, but of their battlereadiness in general. 
But they never went out. Why not? Perhaps they didn't know that Batu Khan's troops had left the camp? But they knew. They could have easily seen that from their battlements; besides, their scouts would have reported it. 
Possibly Batu Khan's forces were in such great numbers that more than enough guards had been left behind to repel an attack on the camp? 
This is the way historians initially explained it. They said the Golden Horde's troops numbered almost a million. Then they changed their minds and reduced their estimate to 130, 000, some even to as few as 30, 000. 
Naturally it is tempting to explain one's defeat by citing the enemy's significantly superior numbers. More objective scholars have begun to say that moving a million-strong army at that time was an absolute impossibility. 
A million swordsmen together with equipment would mean three million horses. If a herd like that were kept in one place, even in the summertime, they would die of hunger, since the grass all around would be trampled down. And in the wintertime no amount of feed supplies would be enough. 
So the figure was reduced to either 130, 000 or 30, 000. A humiliating figure indeed. With a scant hundred and thirty thousand men Batu Khan quietly went about conquering Russian principalities and whole countries too. 
But even this figure is inflated. To subjugate the Russian princes of that time using the knowledge left by Genghis Khan to his descendants, there was simply no need for even a fiftythousand-strong army. All that was required was knowledge 
of the way oflife of the Russian people, Russian families, and the proper strategy based on such knowledge. 
After setting up camp at the city of Vladimir, Batu Khan did not go with a whole army to Suzdal, but sent a small detachment to take it. This is why the people of Vladimir did not leave their fortified city to rout the camp and destroy the enemy's military facilities. 
Do you know how many days and nights it took for Batu Khan's small detachment to conquer one of Rus's spiritual capitals of the time, surrounded as it was by more than a halfdozen monastery fortresses - this legendary city of Suzdal? 
No time at all. He simply arrived, entered the city and burnt the prince's residence. The prince, meanwhile, had fled together with his armed garrison. It was no effort to cut down every last one of the high-ranked clergy and take the young monks captive. And the Mongols later caught up with the prince and his garrison at the Sit' River and destroyed them toO. I8 
How could that be? someone may wonder. Where were the brave Russian people, their indomitable and freedom-loving spirit? 
I can tell you right off that there was nothing wrong with the Russian people and their spirit. Logic suggests that the people applauded Batu Khan's small detachment on its return journey from Suzdal. They served kvas and bragaI9 to the warriors along the whole route back to their camp at Vladimir. 
The reason is that the people of that time did not look upon Suzdal as their city. Rather, they viewed its royal inhabitants as traitors and its clergy as foreign aggressors and enslavers. 
I8This battle took place 4 March I238. Prince Yuri Vsevolodovich was beaten and beheaded by the detachment commander Burundai, who later presented the prince's head to Batu Khan as a trophy. 
I9kvas - a Russian fermented drink made from rye bread or vegetables; brctga - a mild Russian alcoholic beverage. 
This led to the flare-up of a number of rebellions on the part of the people against unbearable oppression. 
Documents at the Vladimir-Suzdal State Museum put it this way: 
By the end of the thirteenth century Suzdal had eight monasteries. Founded by the princes and representatives of the Christian religion, they played a major role in assimilating new territories and served as fortresses in the event of enemy aggression. . .. 
In the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries the Church owned a third of the best lands in the country and was endeavouring to subjugate the power of the Grand Princes to itself. From the end of the fifteenth century on, the State made repeated attempts to limit the landholdings of monasteries and churches, along with attempts at secularisation (in other words, complete eradication). The question of land provoked two ideological tendencies within the Church: Josephism20 and the Non-Possessors Movement. 21 The first defended the monasteries' property interests, while the second emphasised the idea of inner self-perfection and condemned the monasteries' acquisitive pursuits. The ideological leader of the Josephites 
2°Josepbism (Russian: Iosijlianstuo, also known as the Possessors Movement) - a movement defending the ownership ofland by the Russian Orthodox Church, led by Iosif (foseph) Volotsky (or Volokamsky; secular name: Ivan Sanin, 1439- 1515), later recognised as a saint. Not to be confused with the zoth-ccntury use of the same term, designating a movement opposing the Russian Orthodox Church's kowtowing to communist authority following the 1917 revolution (in this case named after Metropolitan Iosif [joseph] of Leningrad). 
2'Non-Possessors Movement (Russian: nestiazbatel'stuo) - an opposition movement to ]osephism, rejecting church land-ownership, led by NilSorsky (secular name: Nikolai Fedorovich Maikov; 1433-1508) and a Greek immigrant, Maxim Grek (secular name: Miebail Trioolis, 1475-1556). 
was Father Joseph, abbot of the Volokolamsky Monastery; while the Non-Possessors Movement was championed by a monk of the Kirillo- Belozersky Monastery; Nil Sorsky. The monasteries and clergyofSuzdal, as major landholders, came down solidly on the side of the Josephites. However, in the sixteenth century the authority of the Grand Princes did not manage to carry out its intended secularisation of the Church's wealthy landholdings, which continued to increase, even though on a limited scale. 
Quite a trick! A third of Russian lands ended up in the hands of the Constantinople-derived" clergy and its puppets. Monasteries were transformed into large-scale slave-owners. And it wasn't the monks who tilled the ground and raised cattle, but the peasant serfs. 
The princes were already trying to reclaim part of the country they had lost. But that was by no means easy! 
And just how was this 'enriching' the souls of the peasants, whose primordial family lands had now become monasterial property at one fell swoop? What was offered to people in exchange for their centuries-old traditions and rites, which were now labelled 'barbarian'? The same archival documents show what happened here: 
Fees and penalties imposed on the peasant serfs of the Pokrovsky Nunnery in 1653 
From each household - two altyns," a chicken and lamb's wool from the first shearing. 
Constantinople (original name: Byzantium, now Istanbul) - the seat of the Greek Orthodox Church, from which the Russian Orthodox Church was derived. 
altyn - a media-val coin worth three kopeks (derived from the Tatar word for 'gold'). A kopek is worth ihoc of a rouble. 
On the purchase of a: 
Horse - 2 dengas." Cow - I denga. 
On the sale of: 
Grain, horses, cows, hay - I altyn for each rouble received. Log houses - I denga per internal corner. 
For settling disputes: 
Regarding field-lands - 2 altyns, 2 dengas. Regarding household lands - 4 altyns, 2 dengas. 
Court fees: 
For travel to the site of a dispute - I denga per verst." For travel in cases of acquittal - 2 dengas per verst. From the guilty party - I altyn for each rouble assessed. From the vindicated party - 7 altyns, 2 dengas. 
For taking an oath - 4 altyns, 2 dengas.
Wedding fees: 
From the groom - 3 altyns, 3 dengas. 
From the bride for a table - 2 altyns, 2 dengas. 
From a groom from outside the district - 2 grivnas." 
From holiday beer-making 
for weddings or funerals - I bucket of beer. 
24denga - a mediaeval coin worth half a kopek. The plural of this word (den'gz) is the current Russian generic word for 'money'. 
25verst (Russian: versta) an old Russian measurement oflength, approximately equivalent to I kilometre. 
26grivna (also known as grivennik) - an old Russian coin worth ten kopeks. 
Into the depths of history 
Penalties: 
For alcohol distillation for one's self without a permit, or for sale 5 roubles, a beating with a cane, and arrest. 
For consumption of wine except on holidays - 8 alryns, 2 dengas, and a beating with a cane. 
And here is a description of the property of the highestranked church official: 
List of people and property belonging to Metropolitan Illarion 
elders, 6 overseers in charge of properties, 66 personal bodyguards, 23 servants, 25 singers, 2 sextons, 13 bell-ringers, 59 craftsmen and labourers. In total: 180 persons. 
Weaponry numbering 93 pieces, silver dishes weighing 1 pood" 20 pounds, pewter dishes weighing more than 16 poods, II2 horses belonging to the Metropolitan's horse farm, 5 carriages, 8 sleighs and chariots, 147 books. 
(From the inventory of the Metropolitan's household, I70 I) 
A most extraordinary document. It is free of any kind of historical inaccuracies. It simply provides an impartial inventory of the Metropolitan's household property. However, it also begs a great many questions. 
What kind of properties did the Metropolitan have that required the services of six overseers? Why a whole twentythree servants for one man? And were the ninety-three pieces of weaponry also intended for the conducting of church rites? 
27pood (rhymes with 'food') - an old Russian unit of mass approximately equivalent to 16-4 kg. A pood was divided into 40 funt (pounds). 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
Note that none of this was the monastery's property - it was just the Metropolitan's personal effects. The monastery had its own. 
Just who was such a large contingent of guards supposed to protect the Metropolitan from? He had more bodyguards than the first American presidents. 
The large contingent of guards, like the high monastery walls, were designed to protect the Metropolitan from the Russian people, of course. The walls of the Suzdal monasteries had no strategic significance in terms of military policy. 
But why then do almost all historical sources describe the high monastery walls with their embrasures as fortresses, designed to protect the people from the enemy? Why were not these so-called fortresses capable of holding out for at least a month? 
Because they weren't at all designed for defence against any external aggressor, let alone a smart one. 
For the soldiers under Genghis Khan's grandson, in any case, such fortifications were no more than a distraction. If the possessors of these mock fortresses had not acceded to the enemy's demand for immediate surrender, the Mongols would have thrown up an embankment a little higher than the walls and dragged their stone-throwing devices up onto it. There are many possible scenarios here. One of them involved putting a bag into the stone-launcher attached to a long rope, and launching the bag over the monastery wall. Before it hit the ground, the bag would become undone, showering the people hiding behind the wall with infected meat. After that, all they had to do was shoot the people as they attempted to escape through the main entrance gate. 
The only thing that the high monastery walls served as a protection against was their own people, the peasant serfs - or, rather, the monastery slaves - who from time to time rebelled. 
It was none other than the Constantinople clergywho applied their lofty 'spirituality' to the inculcation of serflaw28 in Rus'. 
One document from the Suzdal Museum archives attests to the following: 
Church landholdings prevailed in Suzdal in the seventeenth century, as they had before. Monasteries and the Metropolitan's residence were major feudal landlords, with enormous financial resources at their command, not to mention the free labour of many thousands of peasants. 
Thus, the Spaso-Yevfimiev Monastery'? placed fifth among all Russia's church-based feudal landlords. Its prosperity depended wholly upon land grants and contributions. In the second half of the seventeenth century the earlier established fiefdoms did not increase in size, as the inordinate expansion of monastery lands was held in check by the State. The peasants were subject to a double exploitation - first by the landowners (the corvee and tribute system) and secondly by the State (taxes payable in both money and kind). 
28serflaw (Russian: krepostnoye pravo) a feudal system prevalent in Russia (as in other European countries), binding the peasants to the land, subjugating them to the will of the landowners, church and political authorities. In Russia it was introduced by the Law Code (Sudebnik) in I497 and not officially abolished until I861. Even after abolition, most peasants, being granted no land of their own, had no choice for survival except to continue in their servile relationship with the landowners. Slavery-like conditions persisted throughout the Soviet period: peasants could not leave their village without a special permission from the authorities, and were compelled to do unpaid labour. 
Spaso-Yevfimiev Monastery one ofSuzdal's principal monasteries, founded in I352 by Boris Konstantinovich, Prince of Suzdal and Nizhegorod, as a fortress designed to protect the city from enemies both within and without. 
Or take this quote from a similar document on the history of the Sviato-Pokrovsky Nunnery." 
The full and free life enjoyed by the nuns was made possible by the labours of peasant serfs and the enormous staff of servants; the landholdings of the Pokrovsky Nunnery grew, thanks to rich donations and grants on the part of Russia's most elite families, including princes and tsars. 
So there we have it: more lands - more serfs and more wealth. 
But let us return to the thirteenth century. 
What, then, actually happened with the arrival of Batu Khan's detachment at Suzdal? And where do traditions and love enter the picture? 
The population of Suzdal at that time was fewer than 4, 000 inhabitants. It consisted mainly of the prince's armed garrison and servants, craftsmen and clergy with their host of unpaid servants, hiding from the people behind the monasterywalls. 
All around Suzdal and Vladimir lived tens of thousands of peasant families, who were the only ones capable of worthily resisting an aggressor. But they didn't do this, they didn't rise up in arms, they didn't go to the monastery walls to protect the clergy. To put it simply; they hated the clergy. Note that they didn't hate God, only their oppressors. The people loved and revered God. 
Sviato-Pokrovsky (lit. 'Holy Veil') Nunnery - situated close to the SpasoYefimiev Monastery, founded in 1364 by the then Prince of Suzdal, Andrei Konstantinovich (brother to Boris), in gratitude for protection from a violent storm. It received special attention from the Grand Princes of Moscow, including Vasily III and later Ivan the Terrible (the first to proclaim himself tsar). 
It was for this reason that the people didn't rise to the defence of the city of Vladimir. 
Batu Khan waited six days before storming Vladimir. He waited until the news spread that it wasn't the people he was taking captive, but their enslavers. 
He waited and took the well-fortified city in a single day. 
It was to this end that he made the foray against Suzdal. The foray was of no military importance, but it served to deprive the authorities of support from the populace at large. 
And then what did the Mongols do? 
Realising that they could find no better overseers and tax collectors than the princes in collaboration with the clergy, they began to issue the princes licences to govern and the right to collect taxes from the Russian people, a portion of which was to be handed over to the Horde. Many monasteries were exempted from taxation. 
All of this is confirmed by specific documents. Just so people don't go pointing the finger at me or the scientists or secular historians, let us turn directly to literature from the Church itself There is a fairly decent historical book published by the Sviato-Pokrovsky Nunnery - with the blessing of Evlogii," Archbishop of Vladimir and Suzdal, which states: 
Saint Fiodor, the first Bishop of Suzdal, was from a Greek family. He arrived in Rus' in 98i2 in the entourage accompanying Saint Michael from Constantinople. 
3IEviogii (secular name: Yuri Vasilevich Smirnov, 1937-) - consecrated Archbishop of Vladimir and Suzdal in 1990. He is an author of two books: 
Eto bylo cbudo Bozhie (This was God's miracle) and Premirnoe sluzbenie (A humble service). 
the year before the official 'Christianisation' of Rus' by Vladimir I of Kiev (988), through his baptism at the hands of Saint Michael of Kiev - see footnote 6 in Chapter 4: "Wedding rites" above. 
Saint Michael baptised Grand Prince Vladimir at Korsun.f and subsequently became the first Metropolitan of Kiev" 
After the baptism of the Kievans in 988, the prince, who had been accorded apostolic status, travelled around the Russian cities together with his sons and Saint Michael, on a zealous proselytising campaign. Bishoprics were established in Chernigov, Belgorod, Pereyaslavl, Novgorod and Vladimir-Volynsk." 
As can be seen from these reports, as well as from other sources, foreign ideologists were descending upon Rus' en masse. Complete with hired bodyguards and the prince's own contingent, they began to travel around the Russian cities, breaking down foundations that had been in place for millennia, planting an ideology profitable to the Church and government of the day and establishing foreigners in charge of cities. 
Many historical documents testify to how the people resisted, though it appears they were poorly organised, and they did not expect treason on the part of their own prince. It was this treason that was largely responsible for the massive foreign invasion that befell Rus'. The saddest part was that it was done in the name of God. What an incredible sacrilege! 
What if Prince Vladimir and the bishops from Constantinople actually believed sincerely in Christ's commandments? 
33Korsun (also known by its Greek name Chersonesos) - on the southern tip of the Crimzean Peninsula, in what is now Ukraine. 
34St-Michael was appointed first Metropolitan of Kiev by Nicholas II Chrysoberges, who served as Patriarch of the Eastern Orthodox Church in Constantinople from 984 to 996. 
35Chernigov, Belgorod etc. - names of major cities in Ukraine and Russia. Pereyaslavl is now known as Riazan (see footnote 6 in Book 5, Chapter 17: 
"Questions and answers"). 
But subsequent events show that their real masters were the exact opposite of God. They were the servants of this opposite, with the advanced ability to manipulate the people, to subjugate to themselves their spirit and their will. They suggested to Man: you are God's slave, actually meaning: you are my slave. And Man began to forget that God has not and cannot have slaves. Man is the son of God, His beloved son. 
All the quotations reproduced in this book are taken from historical documents. I gained access to them not by going to some super-secret archives, but simply by paying 15 roubles36 to get into the State Museum and 30 roubles for the right to take pictures. I photographed the displays set up for general viewing. One of them was entitled: Monasteries as ecclesiastical feudal landlords. 
And that is by no means the only official State source. 
There are many of them. 
One that exerts an immeasurably greater influence, for example, especially on the young, is a Grade 10 high-school textbook published by Prosveshchenie" in 2003 and recommended by the Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation. This is a high-quality publication under the editorship of A. N. Sakharov38 and V. 1. Buganov? On page 63 it says: 
IS roubles equivalent to approximately US$0.50 at the time. 
Prosveshchenie (lit. 'Enlightenment' or 'Education') - a general educational publishing house founded in 1931 (named Uchpedgiz up until 1964) as a statecontrolled enterprise for the publication and distribution of textbooks and educational literature. The textbook in question is entitled: Istoria Rossii s drevneishikh uremen do kontsa XVII v. (History of Russia from the earliest times up to the end of the 17th century). 
38Andrei Nikolaevich Sakharov (1930-) - historian, author of books on the politics, ideology and culture of Ancient Rus'. Not to be confused with the nuclear physicist and political activist Andrei Dmitrievich Sakharov (1921- 1989). 
Along with this the Church persecuted the old folk pagan culture and came out against the Roman model of Christianity, calling it 'Latinism' and apostasy. This damaged Rus's relations with countries confessing the Catholic faith, and contributed to Rus's isolation from Western European culture. Church facilities began to introduce slave labour. Some clerics and monasteries engaged in usury and victimised people. There were cases where prominent politicians active in the Church took part in political machinations. Thus there frequently arose a discrepancy between the words of the Church and its deeds, and this provoked a feeling of discontent among the people. 
The textbook also mentions that Prince Vladimir, who baptised Rus' in 987, " ... was the son of Sviatoslav?" by a slave of his mother's named Malusha. Consequently he was accorded a secondary ranking among the Prince's sons". 
It further states: 
Vladimir spent more than two years in foreign parts, and when he was approaching Novgorod, he had with him a strong Varangian" contingent. He quickly took control of 
Viktor Ivanovich Buganov (I928-1996) - historian, author of books on the sociopolitical history of Russia from the nth to I8th centuries. He has also published a number of chronicle manuscripts. 
4°Sviatoslav (?-972) - Grand Prince of Kiev, who brought many lands as far away as the Oka River (near present-day Moscow), the Balkans and the Caucasus - under the control of Rus'. He also established alliances with the Hungarians and the Bulgars. 
4Ivarangians (Russian: varyagi, equivalent to Vikings) - Scandinavian (mainly Swedish) explorers and traders who used the Dnieper River through Russia and Ukraine as a conduit to the Mediterranean and Black Sea merchants. According to the Chronicles, they had significant interaction (and intermarriage) with the Slavs and took an active part in the political life of Ancient Rus'. 
Novgorod and began preparing for his trek south. Along the way Vladimir conquered Polotsk, where he killed the reigning Varangian prince Rogvolod and his sons, raping Rogvolod's daughter Rogneda and forcibly taking her to wife." 
The textbook goes on to describe how the Kievan prince Yaropolk, Vladimir's brother, came to negotiate with him. "No sooner had he entered the hall than Vladimir's bodyguards ran their swords through him." 
We also read an account of the baptism and the imposition of a sacramental obligation to pay the Church ro% of the tribute collected from the people. It should be remembered that at that time the Church was in subjugation to the Patriarchate of Constantinople (Russia still did not have its own patriarch), which means that ro% of the tribute money collected from the Russian people was at the disposal of Constantinople. 
Might it not be in historical facts like these that we uncover an answer to the question as to why the people didn't rise to the Church's defence when Peter the Great closed a third of all Russian monasteries and melted down church bells to produce cannon, or when Catherine the Great went about 'secularising' (i.e., confiscating) monastery landholdings, which meant that formerly wealthy monks were obliged 
42Rogvolod (also spelt: Rogvold, Rogvald, Rognvald, Ragnvald, 936-982 or 920-978, depending on source) - Scandinavian-born Prince of Polorsk (on Polotsk - see footnote 7 in Chapter 4: "Wedding rites" above). Rogneda (also speIt: Ragnbild, 962-1002) - reportedly a descendant of the Y nglings royal family of Norway. She bore Vladimir four sons (including Sviatoslav the Wise) and two daughters. It is also reported that after being divorced by Vladimir she entered a convent and took the name Anastasia. Her story was the basis for composer Alexander Nikolaevich Serov's (I820-I87r) opera Rogneda, which had its premiere in 1865. 
to beg for food and live at the mercy of the tsar. Or, when the Bolsheviks started killing clerics and blowing up churches, why some of the people themselves participated in the plunder of church property. 
My remarks on the subject of the Church are based on historical facts and documents. I have resolved to call upon sensibly-minded members of the Church hierarchy and its wise elders who I am sure are out there, to transform the modern Church into a highly spiritual institution, one capable of helping society escape from its economic and spiritual crisis. 
Love and the State's military preparedness 
But what link can there possibly be, readers might wonder, between the conquest of Russia and love? The connection is quite direct. After seizing Russian lands, enslaving the Russian peasants, prohibiting rites capable ofleading to love, the Constantinople assault force thereby began to hinder the formation of strong loving families and especially family domains. This meant, in effect, the immediate imposition of serflaw. 
Love among slaves, as a rule, is a most unhappy love. 
In order for the feeling of love ignited in young people to be preserved, one's own Space is required. If it is not there, love, as a rule, vanishes. And what Space could be possessed by slaves? None at all. 
Let's think: why, over the many millennia before the princes came to Rus', was our territory never conquered? There 
Into tbe depths of bistory 
was the Egyptian army, after all, and the Roman legions, but all these hosts with all their well-trained and well-equipped soldiers did not succeed in conquering our lands. 
To answer this question, let us suppose that Genghis Khan's troops had launched an invasion of pre-Christian Rus'. 
At that time, the territory of our present-day country was inhabited almost exclusively by people living in family communities. At the approach of any army, no matter what its size, the members of the community would hide part of their food supplies, take the remainder with them - along with their household livestock - and head off into the forest. Their horses and cows were loaded up with family belongings. 
An invading army could move into a territory only so far as the provisions they carried with them allowed. But this was already an army on its last legs. The return journey would be impossible. 
They couldn't go hunting in the forest, as that had to be done in small groups (any larger groupings would scare away the game), but once they penetrated the forest, small groups would quickly fall into traps and perish. 
They ate, for the most part, the meat of their own emaciated horses, whose numbers kept rapidly decreasing, so that any kind of movement became exceedingly difficult. 
Our ancestors would set up a whole bunch of clever traps all along the route of the foe's retreat, both in the forests and on the rivers. For example, they would sink a huge tree with prickly branches and stretch a cable tied to the tree across the water and fasten its other end on the shore. Whenever a boat approached the spot, the tree would float to the surface and catch the side of the boat in its branches, and then sink again, overturning the boat in the process. In the meantime the retreating soldiers would be met with a hail of arrows and harpoons launched from the shore. 
But when the retreating soldiers stepped out on the bank, after gathering together the rest of the troops that had been spread out along the flotilla, there was nobody to be seen. 
The people annihilated any enemy that invaded their Motherland. After all, they had something worth protecting. This was no abstract Motherland defined only by a beautiful word with not even a clump of native soil to back it up. They had their own family land, the same land that their ancestors had called home, and now it was where they lived along with their families, children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
And there was love in their families. And they protected their dear mothers, fathers and children. They protected their love! And that was why they could not be conquered. 
CHAPTER SEVEN 
Russia erased 
Anastasia's grandfather and I rode along in silence. As we approached Suzdal and could see its buildings in the distance, I said to him: 
"Look, there's Suzdal! It's a city around a thousand years old. Part of the Vladimir-Suzdal Principality. In fact it was one of the religious capitals of that period." 
"Why are you going there, Vladimir?" 
"I want to pay another visit to the museum, and take a look at the ancient sites, so's I can get a picture of how people lived over the past millennium." 
"Try to get a picture before going into the city. Everything that lies around it is worth immeasurably greater attention than the city itself" 
''All around are just fields," I protested, "with the occasional dilapidated village here and there. No information to help with the picture." 
"Vladimir, stop the car. We shouldn't be talking while driv- 
ing." 
"Don't be afraid, I'm a good driver." 
"I'm not afraid. I know, and so I'd better be quiet." 
I pulled over to the side of the road and stopped the car. 
After a few moments I realised that I couldn't really drive and have this conversation at the same time. The difficulty was that, just like Anastasia, her grandfather sometimes spoke with certain special intonations, so powerful that the listener could perceive visible images, almost like holograms in space. This kind of speech allowed the possibility of showing scenes 
of the past or future, or even on another planet, as Anastasia once did.' 
It's hard to tell just what is behind this phenomenon. 
Possibly hypnosis, possibly some kind of mysterious abilities enjoyed by people of the priestly class. Or maybe it was something possessed by everybody living on the Earth back in ancient times. A talented actor on stage can also create all sorts of pictures and images for an audience with the help of intonations and his own emotions - albeit not as vivid and detailed as those of Anastasia's. Still, it is actors above all others who confirm, through their mastery, the existence of such possibilities in Man. 
It turns out that people of long ago didn't need television, with its huge network of personnel and technology, including satellites even. It turns out that in losing his natural, Godgiven abilities, Man replaces them with awkward artificial substitutes which are far less perfect. And he even boasts about it, calling his inventions a significant achievement. 
The saddest part is that mankind today is losing its capacity for logical thinking. This is more than just a sad state of affairs. It is a most frightful epidemic, capable of transforming modern humanity into a bunch of mad rodents, devouring one another and destroying their own living environment. Suicide-rodents. 
What Anastasia's grandfather was to tell me in the field needs to be understood. It gives rise to the following conclusion: in losing the ability to think logically, the people of the Earth no longer are able to see and understand the unenviable situation they are being pushed into. Judge for yourselves. 
I had stopped the jeep at the side of the road. The grey-haired oldster got out and headed into a field. I followed along behind. Before long he stopped and bowed low to the ground, saying: 
! See Book 4, Chapter 22: "Other worlds". 
"Health to your thoughts and aspirations, dear people!" He uttered this greeting most sincerely and with such a tone that it seemed as though there really were people standing there in front of him. Then something happened that I can't put a name to, at least not for now. 
At first there was some sort of stirring in the air, and a barely noticeable mist arose from the earth. It seemed to be congealing, and soon afterward I could clearly see the outlines of some kind of human figure becoming increasingly distinct. And, finally, there standing before us was an elderly man with a powerful physique. A headband encircled his light-brown hair. He had a calm expression on his face, with just a trace of despondency. Behind him, in the distance, I could see gardens, copses and beautiful wooden mansions. It looked as though the barren fields of a moment ago were now populated with a whole lot of families. 
The man standing before us was speaking in inaudible tones to the Siberian elder. The vision lasted for several minutes. Then it slowly began to dissipate, as though being erased by an invisible hand. What was being erased was the genuine Rus', not a Rus' someone had simply thought up. The vision disappeared altogether when Anastasia's grandfather turned in the direction of Suzdal. He stood there silently staring toward the city; then turned to me and asked: 
"What, do you think, Vladimir, was the original purpose of the city we see in the distance?" 
"What's thinking got to do with it? Everybody knows this from their history: Suzdal was where the clergy was cloistered. The first Christian bishops lived here. The monasteries and the kremlin" where the elite lived are still preserved today. That's a historical fact." 
kremlin _ the Russian word describing a fortress in the middle of a city; the most famous example being the Kremlin in Moscow. 
"Yes, you're right, historical. But all Russia's ancient cities have two histories. The original history is more significant." 
"I guess we'll never be able to rediscover the original history." "We shall know, Vladimir. You will figure it out through your own logic and you will even be able to see it. But start by determining the reason these cities sprang up, along with their original purpose."
"I would say their purpose lies in the fact that they made it easier to live together and defend themselves against enemy invasion. For example, apart from the clergy and the elite, Suzdal was home to many craftsmen. They produced equestrian harnesses, carts, sleighs, earthenware pots, ploughs and harrows. They would sell these items and live off the proceeds." 
"Who did they sell them to?" 
"10 the peasants, of course," I responded. 
"That's it," the old fellow confirmed. "They sold or bartered their handicrafts for produce. And the produce came into the city from all the many outlying domains." 
"Yes, of course." 
"But which d'you think came first, which was primary in this place - the domains or the city?" 
"The domains, I would say. The builders and the craftsmen would want to eat every day. If they started to build things in the open fields, there would have been nowhere to get their food from." 
"Correct. So we've come to the conclusion that a little more than a thousand years ago the fields around this city were the site of marvellous, rich domains. And the place where the city of Suzdal sits now was the site of their hapisbcbe'" 
"What is a kapishche?" 
"It's a place where people gathered together from all around for fairs, to exchange goods and procure household 
3kapishche - pronouncedKAH-peesh-cheh. 
Russia erased 
effects. They shared experiences with each other. They put on massive celebrations with singing and dancing, and some of which were designed to help people find their soulmates. 
"This was also the place the elders of the families gathered for a uiecbe' and adopted unwritten rules for living. They could censure a wrongdoer for his crime, although such instances were rare. Their censure was even a more fearful sentence than physical punishment." 
"And who was in charge of this whole land?" 
''A hired hand. I really can't think of an alternative term. 
A hired hand was the administrator in the kapishche. But he wasn't really in charge. Rather, he carried out the decisions taken by the elders. 
"For example, when they desired to put in a new tethering-post or a new road or build a big barn, it transpired that people from each domain would be assigned to carry out that decision. Sometimes the hired hand would be required to find other hired workers like himself 
"It was also his job to keep the whole kapishche clean and neat. Let's say they had a fair, and after it was over, people dispersed to their homes. Then the tethering-posts might have had to be fixed and the horse-droppings cleaned up allover the place. This task would be carried out by the hired hand and his assistants. If he performed his work carelessly; the elders could sack him from his job. And then either the hired hand would go and look for work at another kapishche, or he would stay where he was, but be demoted to a hired hand's assistant. It was difficult for the elders to maintain hired help, as just about everyone wanted to live in their own domains. Thus it might happen that hired hands for kapishches could be acquired from foreign lands. 
4vieche - a council in ancient Russia. See footnote 5 in Chapter I: "Love - the essence of the Cosmos" above. 
BOOK 8, PART 2: RITES OF LOVE 
"The Vedruss social order ofRus' before the princes rose to power lasted for many thousands of years. It was superior to all the state social orders we know today; and it extended to all the continents of the Earth. 
"When the Earth was overcome by corruption, Egypt and Rome fell into slavery; but the Vedruss social order in Rus' still lasted five-and-a-half thousand years." 
"But why did the Vedruss social order give way to corruption, too?" 
"Which are you most interested in - Rome, Ancient Egypt or Rus'? Pretty much the same thing happened in all three." 
"If they're pretty much the same, then let's go for Rus'. I already know that it was subject to external invaders, resulting in the destruction of the traditions and culture of the great Vedruss civilisation." 
"There were invasions, but there's much more to it than that. The Vedruss social order underwent its first changes in other lands, back when there was no foe to invade. There were no armies. There were no wars or military campaigns, because there was nothing that could lead to them. The whole Earth at the time was made up of marvellous domains. People's culture and concepts were truly outstanding. Everybody knew that to take vegetables or fruit out of someone else's orchard by force or stealth was not only improper - it was useless and dangerous to one's self. 
"Only through produce that was given freely and with desire could benefit be acquired. 
"Neither was it considered proper to take household animals from someone else's domain by deceit or by force. A cow would not have let a stranger come close. And somebody else's dog might have shown itself to be not a friend, but a foe. And a horse might have taken the occasion to throw a rider if it were not its own. 
"With concepts like these, who would dare invade? Such concepts made invasions absurd. Corruption, in the main, came from ignorance, or rather from treason or betrayal, even in little things, of the culture of one's forebears, their way oflife. The family chain leads us to God. To betray one's forebears' meaning oflife is tantamount to killing God within one's self 
"Yes, in Rus', of course, the people were deceived, through the priests' well-honed manipulative techniques - techniques which are still active in our own time. Back then the elders overlooked this subtle play, and their mistake is still being paid for by subsequent generations even today." 
CHAPTER EIGHT 
The elders' mistake 
From a hired hand to a prince 
At the beginning of the present era many countries were already ruled by emperors, pharaohs or tsars. The form of government under which a large state is controlled by one Man is unnatural. It has never brought and will never bring a good, happy life to a single nation on the face of the Earth. This form of government benefits the priests, who manipulate countries through their rulers. It is difficult, after all, to negotiate with all the people at once, a lot easier to deal with just a single individual. I 
Only in Rus' they did not succeed in setting up a single ruler. Everyone there was guided by the tribal elders' council. These councils were not something that could be corrupted or forced, under threat, into a decision that would lead to the oppression of the people. Who would make such an obscene decision for one's children? 
Several times, through various subterfuges in different places, the priests' assistants attempted to set up a princely authority, a single ruler over the people. In this particular area, for example, events unfolded as follows. 
One day a stranger from afar arrived at the Vedruss kapishche situated where Suzdal is now. Like the wise-men, itinerant minstrels, and craftsmen, he was offered food and lodging. 
'The first section of this chapter, told to the author by Anastasia's grandfather, is presented without identifying quotation-marks. 
The elders'mistake 
The stranger stayed two weeks, but did not engage in any useful activity. The hired hand in charge questioned him: 
"What useful contribution, stranger, can you make to our kapishche?" 
And the stranger replied: 
"None at all, but to you personally I can render an invaluable service. I have heard rumours that the elders are not happy with you. In a year, maybe even half a year, you will be let go. If you take my advice, on the other hand, the elders will be crawling on their knees before you. You can have your pick of girls from any domain to wife, whereas right now there's not a single one that would live with you. I can make it so that it will be your decisions, and not those of the tribal elders, that will be carried out." 
The hired hand in charge of the kapishche (and part-time janitor) agreed. He listened to the stranger, an agent of the priests. And the stranger proposed: 
"When people gather for a fair at the kapishche from all around and stay until the following morning, during the night you will cut your face with a knife, and leave the kapishche along with your trustworthy assistants, so that you can return in the evening with broken-winded horses. During the night I and my assistants (they are already here in the guise of artists and craftsmen), will take the horses away from their tethering-posts, and you will bring them back in the evening, saying you recaptured them from the miscreants. 
"In your wounded state you will ask the elders for an armed garrison for their own protection. They will agree. You will take my companions into your garrison: they will all meekly obey your command." 
The hired hand agreed to the criminal act. He did everything according to the stranger's proposal. 
When the 'wounded' man returned toward evening with the herd of stolen horses, he learnt that not only had the
