                               A M A Z O N 
                                (Trillium)

Amazon  is  not really a particularly difficult game; what makes it hard in
some  spots  is  the tricky syntax needed to solve a problem or get past an
obstacle. With this solution you should have no trouble at all in finishing
the  game.  One  note  before  we  get  started:  this  solution is for the
intermediate  (seasoned  explorer)  version. The explorer version has a few
problems/situations  that are not in the novice version. I will point these
out in the solution and those playing the novice version can ignore them!

Ok, you start at NSRT headquarters, waiting for the satellite transmission.
Just  wait  (one  move is all that's needed), and the picture will come in.
Adjust  your  keys  to   "tune  in".  Keep  adjusting  until the picture is
clear.

After  viewing  the  scene  of  the  massacre,  "Go  Office"  to  get  your
assignment.  Give  your  name to Murphy when he asks, and say "yes" to next
question.  You  can  answer  either  "yes"  or "no" to the "are you scared"
question,  and  "ok"  to  the question after that one (Murphy asks a lot of
questions).

When  he asks what level you are, you can answer "Seasoned Explorer" if you
like (or Novice, if you prefer). He'll hand you an envelope and tell you to
go  to  the  airport.  So, do just that, "go airport". Once there, open the
envelope,  which  tells  you  which city to go to, as well as containing an
airplane ticket. "Go Miami".

When  you  get  there,  tell  the taxi driver to take you to the Institute.
Don't  allow  him  to  take you to a hotel, because you'll never get there.
When  you  reach  the Institute, and try to enter the building, a policeman
will stop you. Show him your letter, and he'll let you in (for someone on a
secret mission, you sure are giving out a lot of information!).

Enter  the building, where you'll find a secretary. Tell her your name, and
answer yes to the map question. Then head east down the hall to the office,
and  enter it. You won't be able to do anything here until you talk to Paco
the  obnoxious  parrot,  so "get drape". Tell Paco your name, then open the
cage. Answer yes to all his questions.

Open  the refrigerator when he tells you, and get the fruit. You won't need
the  medicine,  so leave it. Give the fruit to Paco, then call him: "Paco".
Now  you  can open the cupboard. Examining the shelves will show you a dart
gun and some food for the parrot. Get those, then leave the office.

The  director  will show up, telling you that you can't take Paco with you.
Offer the director a bribe: "Bribe director". Keep saying no to his demands
until he's down to ten thousand dollars, then agree. You can now leave with
Paco, so "go airport". Once there, buy tickets for Paco and yourself.

You  will  be paged to the courtesy booth. Answer yes to the name question,
then  take  your  pack. The only way to find out what's in there is to take
inventory;  just looking at or examining the pack won't work (inventory can
be  abbreviated  to  inv).  Open  the envelope and write down the emergency
transmission code, then read the note that has your regular code (you might
want to write that one down, as well).

Now  it's  time  to  be  on  your  way,  so  "go  amazon". You will make an
unscheduled  refueling stop in Guatemala City. The immigration officer will
demand  cigarettes;  give  them  to him. You really don't need them for the
Kemani  later  on. If you are playing the Explorer version, you will make a
further stop in La Paz. Here, whatever you do, you will be robbed, and left
with only your computer and belt. Turn your computer on ("computer on") and
input your emergency code.

After  the transmission, the police will arrive with Paco, and demand money
to  return  him to you. Give them the belt (which is a money belt with gold
inside),  and  you  will  have  Paco  with  you once more. The rest of this
portion is automatic, and you will eventually be in the Amazon.

Ok, so here you are, flat on your back in the jungle. Sit up, and after the
sound  effects are over, turn your computer on and input your regular code.
When  the  transmission is finished, go East. You're on a jungle trail. Try
to  go  north,  and  a wild boar appears. Luckily, he will go back into the
bushes again. Now you can really go north, where you will hear the sound of
guns firing. Corrupt government troops are very close!

Go  east, and sure enough, there they are. And they capture you, too. There
is  no  way  around  this,  but it doesn't matter, since you'll be escaping
later  on, anyway. You're taken to a tent, and securely tied. Wait, and the
captain  will  come  in. He isn't too nice, and accuses you of being a spy.
Then  he'll  ask if you have any money to pay for your freedom. You can say
yes and tell him to look in the pack.

Of  course,  there's  no money there; the troops have already taken it. The
captain  will toss the pack aside and leave, promising to have you executed
in  the  morning, if not sooner, a cheery prospect. Wait until night falls,
and  Paco  will  come  around  looking for you. Call him: "Paco", and he'll
enter the tent and free you. Take your pack and go west to leave the tent.

It's  pretty dark out there, and hard to see. Wear your goggles, and you'll
be  able  to  go  north  out of the camp. You must wear the goggles, or you
won't  be  able  to  do  this  safely.  Once away from the camp, remove the
goggles.  However, now the soldiers know you're missing, and they're coming
after you (oops)!

This  is  definitely  an  emergency, so turn on your computer and input the
emergency  code.  NSRT  will  guide you (provided you have your map and map
coordinate tables) to a safe location. Once there, get some sleep.

In  the  morning,  take  the path north. Woosh! An arrow just barely missed
you!  Out  from the bushes steps a Kemani tribesman, bow ready. You want to
make  sure he knows that you're friendly, so smile. He will take you to his
village,  where  the  men  will crowd around, making odd motions with their
hands.  They obviously want cigarettes, but you gave those away a long time
ago.  Just keep entering commands like "go hut" etc., until the Kemani kick
you out into the jungle.

This  is  a small maze of no great difficulty. Just go North, North, North,
East,  and you'll be in a clearing. North again brings you to Macuma. North
once  more, and you're on the slopes, pretty high up. It's a trifle chilly,
so wear your parka. Now keep going up until you reach the snowstorm.

Here, you can't go further without help, so turn on the computer. Enter the
emergency  code.  As  before,  NSRT  will guide you safely out of the storm
(provided  you  have  the map, etc). Then go north and enter the lava tube.
Have  another  night's  sleep  (I  wonder  how  Paco managed to survive the
freezing  cold?).  In  the morning, continue north until you're back in the
jungle.

North  again  (the  favorite  direction  in  this game!), and you come to a
clearing,  where  you see a crate floating down from the sky. Go east until
you come to the drop site. Open the crate, and get the rifle. Also take the
parachute.  Leave the raft and oar, because they are both useless (the raft
has  a  hole, and the oar is broken. So is the rifle, but you won't need to
fire it). Then head north to the river.

Ok, so now you're at the river. It's dark again, so wear your goggles. Aha,
there's  a  hippo  feeding at the river. Just wait until he leaves, then go
west  until  you  come to the native boat. Examine the boat, and you notice
that  there's  a  small hole in it. "Use parachute", and that will plug the
hole. Now go south, and you'll find a handy paddle.

Go back north to the boat. You're almost ready to cross, but first you have
to  do  something  about the water-phobic parrot. "Shoot Paco", and he will
collapse into your arms. Get into the boat, and "cross river".

Part  of  the  way  over, alligators will appear. Your rifle is useless for
shooting,  but you can use it as a club. This is a tricky one, because "hit
alligators"  won't  work.  Instead,  you  must  say "use rifle" (silly, but
that's  what  will  work).  If  you  are  playing the Explorer version, the
alligators  leave,  but come back. When this happens, "use paddle", and you
will row fast enough to make the shore before they get to you.

This  is  a good time to save the game. A totally purposeless and extremely
frustrating  arcade  sequence  is  coming  up. There is no way to avoid it,
alas,  and  you  may  lose your patience with it the first time around. Ok,
you're  across the river, and you'll be too tired to turn on your computer.
So you might as well just sleep.

In  the morning, you'll find that monkeys have stolen everything except the
computer.  NSRT  will  try  to  guide you to the monkeys, but they move too
fast.  Here is where the arcade sequence begins. You will have to move your
little  dot  (using  either  the N-S-E-W or the I-J-K-M keys) after the dot
that  represents  the monkeys with the pack. This is not easy, but, believe
me, it can be done, even if it seems to take forever!!

Once  you have the pack (and saved the game so you won't have to go through
this idiocy again), go east to the bridge. Paco will not want to cross, but
you  can  persuade  him  by saying: "use gun". Do NOT "shoot Paco", because
he'll  have  convulsions. Just the threat is sufficient to get him to cross
over.

About  half-way  across, the bridge starts to collapse. Just continue east,
and  you'll make it safely over. From there, go south until you come to the
Tree of Skulls, and go west from there. Aha! The entrance to the Lost City!
However, don't get carried away just yet!

First, turn on your computer, and enter the regular code. Don't worry about
the  tape  of  the  massacre  that  is  transmitted; it is not of the least
importance  to  you.  Once  transmission  is  completed,  go  south  to the
campsite.  This is another good place to save the game, because yet another
tedious arcade sequence is about to happen.

The Huni will be attacking soon, so wear your goggles. Then turn your laser
on.  The  Huni  will  now  attack. This night, there are, fortunately, only
three  of them to kill. Use the left and right arrows to manuever the laser
(which  looks  like something left over from "Space Invaders"), and use the
space  bar  to  fire  (you  stop automatically when you shoot). Once you've
gotten rid of the Huni, you can get a good night's sleep.

In  the morning, go back north to the Lost City. Continue going north until
you  come  to  the storeroom. Ignore the fruit (not important) and go east.
This is a temple with a large statue. The statue is not important. Go north
to  the  wall  and  push  it. A lever appears! Pull the lever, and a set of
stairs is revealed.

Go  down  the stairs. The entrance closes behind you, but don't worry about
it. Go west to the end of the passage, then up to the vast hall. West again
will bring you to a tiny room, and north to the wall with the key. Take the
key and go south and east back to the hall, then north to the door.

Unlock the door. You'll find a piece of paper on the floor. When you try to
read  it, you'll see that it's in code. Your computer will beep, so turn it
on.  NSRT  will  tell  you what the paper says. Now is another good time to
save the game, in case you make a mistake later. You will have to enter the
Antechamber  and open the doors in the proper sequence. One wrong move, and
you're dead.

Ok, go west. Here are the three doors that must be opened. The sequence is:
Open  132.  If you're playing the Explorer version, you will have to open a
second  set  of  doors, but the code is the same. How about that! You found
the emeralds at last!

However, Macuma is about to blow its top. In fact, the whole place seems to
be  coming  down!  Fortunately,  the  rest  of this is almost automatic. Go
south,  and continue south until you come to the soft volcanic earth. Here,
you go up into the pit room, and then west out of the city.

The  lost  city  crumbles before your eyes, but don't despair! A helicopter
appears at the last moment, taking you and Paco to safety. Congratulations!
You've just finished your first mission for NSRT!!!!!


   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
