Solution to "Bullhockey!" by B F Lindsay

THE APARTMENT

You begin "Bullhockey!" in the upstairs bedroom of your apartment.  Of course you should read the crumpled note, which basically spells out your predicament--your girlfriend Natalie has apparently left, and you are without your work shirts, which you will need to return to work the following Monday (currently it's Wednesday), if only to re-establish some sanity or order in your life.  You won't immediately be able to get down the stairs, because Natalie seems to have returned, to look for her 'mojo' (her 'lucky charm'), and moved some bookcases to block the bottom of the stairway (it's a narrow staircase)--you'll learn this from the sticky note she left on one of the bookcases.  You won't be able to move them from where you are--you'll have to get down by some other means.  All you will need from the upper level here is your backpack, your notepad (SEARCH PILE--the one by the bed), and your walking stick (the staff--LOOK UNDER BED).  Make sure you always have these things, though there will be a few times where you'll have to put them down.

This is a small, two-story apartment--the overhead fan is just over the banister from all locations on this upper level--but at different distances from each location.  It is also your ticket downstairs, but first, you'll have to turn it off.  The switch is on the fan itself, but you cannot reach it with your hands--you'll need the staff to turn it off with.  If you look at the fan from different locations, you'll see (or not) the switch from different angles.  The switch is on the side opposite from the Loft Bedroom--it is in full view from Stairs--but way too distant.  However, in Bedroom Entrance, it is much closer and you see it in profile--an ideal angle from which to HIT FAN SWITCH WITH STAFF.  Now you want to GET ON FAN, but not from Bedroom Entrance, because you also want something sturdy which will break your fall, when the fan detaches, and possibly reduce chance of injury--how about the train-safe refridgerator??  Go to Loft Bedroom and GET ON FAN (JUMP OVER BANISTER will also work, there).   You will now be able to MOVE BOOKCASES from downstairs--if you want.

You can now explore the apartment, if only to find some clue of where to start your mission.  Read the message on the mirror in the bathroom, take the binoculars, in the black case (these will be indispensible) from Natalie's bedroom. You'll find the key to her closet stuck in her chair cushions if you SIT IN NATALIE'S CHAIR or SEARCH NATALIE'S CHAIR.  You can look in her closet (SEARCH ART DESK to find the light switch for it), but that won't be useful until you find all the shirts.  When you leave Natalie's room, after getting the binocs--Surprise!--you find your office shoes!  Easy points!  Go to the Kitchen and look out the back window--see the odd flash of red?  LOOK AT ODD FLASH WITH BINOCULARS.  Now you have a sense of purpose.  You can go out the front door now, but be sure you're clear on which building the Red Shirt is on top of.  The building right in front of your back window, the one with the black trampoline on top, is Brockwood's Men's Store.  The building that has your shirt on top is the one directly across the street from it going due east--from Brockwood's and your back window (on the east wall of the apartment).  You just need to remember that it's across from Brockwood's.

THE RED SHIRT

- WALTER

Going north out the front gate from the parking lot, you go east to Center Street, then go south to get to Brockwood's.  You are free to do some exploring, but your destination is really the building across the street from Brockwood's.  It's the Vacant Building.  You can't climb up the building from the street; you'll have to go into the building--the main entrance is barred off--but there is another entrance--go south then east into the Gravel Lot--the entrance is north from here.  You'll have to find out how to get Walter to let you in.  Ask him some questions--ASK WALTER ABOUT MAGAZINE, ASK WALTER ABOUT HIMSELF, ASK WALTER ABOUT BUILDING, ASK WALTER ABOUT REHAB, ASK WALTER ABOUT LUNCH BOX--you can ask him about other things (even your Red Shirt), but the idea is to gain his trust by showing an interest in him and/or the building.  Then he will make a proposition--get him a 'drink' and he will let you in.  He will even tell you how to get the 'libation'.  You'll have to get it from Brockwood's!

- BROCKWOOD'S

Then you go into Brockwood's Store--he will take your backpack--don't worry, you won't need it here, and you'll get it back once you leave.  Go northwest to the Fitting Room.  Look in the mirror there--push the mirror, then voila, you can enter the back room (the locked door in the sales area leads to it, but you can't use that door).  There is a desk there, with a waste basket next to it.  You'll need to get into the large drawer, this is where Brockwood hides his booze.  (By the way, I encourage you to look at everything that seems interesting in this game!)  Look in the waste basket for the key.  Read the ledger that's in the drawer--to feel better about stealing his gin.  For an interesting excursion, try sitting in the swivel chair, and SPIN CHAIR.  You'll get the key to the hatch in the ceiling, to get on the roof--this will remind you of the trampoline that is there, and the location of the Red Shirt.  Though you don't really need anything up here.  Now go back down through the Fitting Room and into the store, with the gin bottle--surprisingly, Brockwood will allow you to leave with his bottle--he's really trying to give it up.

- THE BAIT AND SWITCH

But really, you have no intention of giving a bottle of real gin to an alcoholic.  The game won't let you!  You'll have to make Walter 'think' that it's real gin.  From Brockwood's Front, go south then west to Business Parking, then northwest to Brockwood's Nook--there's a water tap there.  POUR OUT the gin bottle, then TURN ON WATER TAP, and FILL BOTTLE WITH TAP.  Don't worry about opening or closing the bottle, that's automatic.  Then go back to Walter in Vestibule (SE, E, E, E, N) and give him the bottle.  He'll assume it's real because you obviously got it from Brockwood, he won't ask questions, he'll leave, giving you his nametag.  You can now enter the building, but there's one more item you'll need--go back out to Gravel Lot, go NE, and pick up the lantern there.  Now turn it on and you have light.  Now go through the Vestibule into the Cluttered Passage, you'll find the roll of duct tape and a newspaper page--which you'll want to look at (please take all take-able items, they will all fit in the backpack).

- THE SCIENCE LESSON

As you go into the Auditorium, you'll notice a hatch way up in the ceiling--it's open!  If you guessed that your Red Shirt is on the roof beyond this hatch, you're correct!  You'll need to figure out how to get up there.  The key is LEVERAGE.  The newspaper page gives some clue--you're going to put together something that will help you get up there--if only to get your shirt.  Try some things--turn on the spigot, turn it off, turn on the 'engine', turn it off--just to get a 'feel' of what you're about to do (Don't worry, Walter won't come back until after you 'do your thing' here, no matter how long it takes)--already there is what is called an Archimedean Screw, this is your base power source.  Now, go west into the Dim Front--you'll find a scaffold, examine it--better yet, look at it through the binoculars.  Now PUSH SCAFFOLDING EAST. The scaffolding has a yardstick on top, with a 5-gallon bucket tied to the end, and it's held down up there by a statue--a precarious balance--try to think of what would throw this balance off?  LEVERAGE.  Fill that bucket, and the statue will topple.  What can fill it--because you cannot reach it--??  The engine.  You'll need to PUSH SCAFFOLDING TO ENGINE.

So, how could the statue toppling be useful to you??  You could PUSH SEESAW TO SCAFFOLDING--but there's one more thing.  You might not get enough LEVERAGE to vault you through the hatch (and yes, you are going to be on the seesaw). TURN CRANK CW(or CLOCKWISE)--try both directions to get a 'feel' for how it works.  What happens?  A bathtub appears, suspended by a chain.  Look at it, better yet with the binocs.  You'll find that if you turn the crank CW, the bathtub gets nearer to the engine--CC(or COUNTERCLOCKWISE) makes it go the other direction.  You'll want the tub to be next to the scaffolding, so TURN CRANK CW until the tub almost buts up against the scaffolding.  Let the messages guide you.  Your final addition will be the seesaw--PUSH SEESAW TO STAGE EDGE--you don't want it to be directly under the tub.

Now, all you have left to do is put some energy through this system.  And you--the Artist--are going to be the vital fifth element.  Get your stuff together--everything in the backpack, close it up, put it on your back, put the staff through the straps.  You won't need the lantern beyond this room, so you can drop it here.  Now turn on the spigot, turn on the engine--you have a generous five moves to get on the seesaw.

Now let it sing!

If all went well, you are back in Kitchen--having gone through the hatch--but not before seeing Walter charge back in--snatched your Red Shirt, crossed the street (albeit in the air), bounced off of the trampoline and through your own back window.  You've come full-circle!  Don't worry about the police that are now in that Gravel Lot (Walter called them), just avoid it.  You'll get thrown in jail anyway, which will be part of this journey, but I'd rather you do that part last (but if you want to go ahead and do it, go to the Gravel Lot or the police station and get yourself arrested by either having Walter's nametag on you or giving the nametag to the sergeant at the station--then skip ahead to BOB AND ROGER, and come back when done).

You can continue exploring, but you won't be able to get anywhere without interacting with Jerry, the Barber.  So---

JERRY AND THE WHITE SHIRT

If you're wondering why he is groping around, you can either look at the pictures on the walls, or in the hallway to the east of his Shop area--or just ASK JERRY ABOUT GLASSES.  He'll tell you that he tripped on the curb and they fell off and 'bounced off somewhere'.  Go to Corner Curb and look in the grating--that's where the glasses are.  Jerry is a bit self-absorbed, so you're going to have to figure this one out without his (conscious) help.  Your utility key will not help you open the grating--you're going to need something sharper or flatter.  You may have noticed the screwdriver in the barber chair..??  Of course, you can't just take the screwdriver in the presence of its possible owner, so you'll have to engage in a little subterfuge.  GET IN BARBER CHAIR--you'll automatically put down your backpack and other stuff.  You'll be surprised when Jerry pulls out your White Shirt(!), using it as a bib.  You'll have to play along here, because you won't be able to just take the shirt just now, Jerry is a bit stubborn.  Let him cut your hair, but while you are on the chair, TAKE SCREWDRIVER.  When he's finished, you'll be out of the chair again and you'll need to give him the $10 bill--declining the $2 change as a courtesy to him (you won't need it).  Then go to Corner Curb and PRY GRATING WITH SCREWDRIVER.  Then open it and take the glasses.  Play around with them for a while if you want, but they are useless to you--and the world to Jerry.  Give them to him, and you get--a ticket to Bunco Springs Amusement Park(BSAP), down the street.  But not your shirt...

Go east from the shop, into the bathroom, if you haven't already.  There is a sheet in the hole in the ceiling--you'll see it when you LOOK UP.  It's the source of the draft.  You'll need to get this sheet down.  Neither the sink nor the toilet are sturdy enough to stand on, so you'll have to get on the shelf--with the towel bar to hold on to.  Take the magazine off of the shelf, then take the towel--you'll need something to replace the sheet with--then GET ON SHELF.  Now take the sheet and see what it really is.  It's a barber bib!  Now put the towel in the hole--you will automatically spread the towel over the hole.  Now you can go back into the shop area and give the barber bib to Jerry.  Now he's a happy camper!  Plus, seeing his error, he gives you your shirt back!  Now you have your White Shirt.  And you're ready for the park!

THE PARK

You can do more exploring again, if you want.  If you go to the Demolished Building further south past the park, you'll see a yellow streamer hanging from the flagpole.  Using the binocs, once again, you discover it's your Yellow Shirt!  You won't be able to get it, yet, because you don't yet have the means to do so, however the sign in front of the building gives you a clue.  Now you should focus on the park, and what you CAN do.  Remember the suggestion about getting your spirits up and perhaps a ride will do the trick...??  Though you are supposed to be 'afraid of heights', but now you are so depressed that you don't care.  Anyway, go in through the Amusement Park Entrance, and give the ticket to Chester in the ticket trailer.  Feel free to get to know Chester and how much of a jerk he is.  You can do some exploring around the park, and even see the demolished building from another angle, at the end of the 'nature path'--go into the hole in the tower, go up the stairs--you'll see the Thinker, and the skylight up top--that's where the flagpole is rooted.  You won't be able to open this skylight or remove it, but tuck it away in your memory.

And be careful not to leave the park until after you get results--and you'll know it when you've done it.

If you tried to get on the roller-coaster, you'll notice no one is there to start the ride, you won't be able to start it, so nix the idea for now.  Really, the only other ride is the Wonder Wheel, manned by our friend Rex.  If you're feeling really sneaky, go to his car in the parking lot and LOOK IN REX'S CAR--you'll get a white paper bag--there's some stale popcorn in it so he won't mind..?? (In fact, if you don't take the bag, and you do the Wonder Wheel, he'll leave for lunch in his car, leaving the bag behind.)  Feel free to ask Rex about anyone you've met so far, even about important things.  Ask him about the duck, in fact ask him about the popcorn.  Ask Rex about himself.  Now have your binoculars in hand--or wear them--so he can see them--then GET INTO WHITE CAR--he'll see your binocs and tell you he'll stop the wheel once you get up top--this is crucial, as it's an important vantage point, and you'll get only one chance to do this.  Once he stops the wheel, you'll notice something--what's that clinging to the nearer loop on the roller-coaster??  LOOK AT BLUE SPLOTCH WITH BINOCULARS--that's your Blue Shirt!!  You'll have 6 moves to do this before the wheel starts up again, and you are back on ground level.  Feel free to use the remaining time to look at other things around you, with the binocs.

Now, you can go to the Kiddie Pond, and give the popcorn to the duck--he gives you a gift.  TAKE ROCK.  Perfect for throwing.  You'll realize its use when you get on the Crock Blocker!

When you are on the platform for the Blocker, you have six cars to choose from.  This is important--if you get on the wrong car, too far forward, you won't be able to catch your shirt as it floats by when you are doing the second loop.  In fact, if you get on the yellow car, you're doomed, because the bar on it is loose--avoid it (devilish grin)--get on the rear car, #6.  Don't forget to DROP your stuff before getting into the car.  Now when you are in the car, throw the rock at the green lever, and let the ride begin!  You won't have to type a command, just let the ride do its thing, you've made the important choices and now just sit and enjoy.  You'll catch your Blue Shirt near the end of the ride.

But you won't be able to rest yet...

Hear the ticking noise..??

SEARCH CONTROL BOOTH.  Now you have an incendiary device in the shape of a pipe.  Time is important here.  Don't worry about the whats and whys now, you'll need to put the pipe where it won't be of any danger to anyone, but perhaps more importantly, where it would be of use to you.  In fact, I encourage you to play around with it, have some fun, try giving it to people, etc etc.  Take advantage of SAVE and RESTORE.  You have 20 moves to get this right.  Think back carefully about where this device might be of use.  Seen any demolished buildings lately??

And have you been in the tower?  Third floor?

More crucially, remember your Yellow Shirt?? It's on the flagpole at the top of the tower.  You'll need to get this --shall I say, 'bomb'--up there.  You'll need to somehow attach it to the skylight, so it will work properly--just leaving it in the room won't be effective enough.  Got the tape?  PUT TAPE ON PIPE.  Now, PUT PIPE ON SKYLIGHT--it will stick.  Now, high-tail it out of there, fast!

BOOOMMM...

Now, you've got 15 moves to do this right....and pay attention to what goes on, particularly after the bomb goes off...if you don't see these things, you won't know why you'll need to do certain things, particularly Chester's movements, and the hawk that flies over--you'll see all this if you are back in the park in time to hear the blast from there. Chester will run out of the trailer to get a look, and at the same time, a hawk will fly over, with 'something yellow' in its beak.  You'll see the hawk deposit it on top of the trailer, realizing it to not be food.  Chester meanwhile will run to his car to contact--the police?--on his wireless.  You'll need to get into the trailer and do 2 things--1) get your shirt from out of the skylight, and 2) develop evidence against Chester, because he's certainly got a leg up on you.

First thing's first--you won't be able to get into the trailer from the front window.  You'll have to go to the back of it, via BSAP Parking (go SE from there, or S from Main Exit).  Look under the trailer for the key.  Unlock the door there and you are in.  Your Yellow Shirt is there in the skylight--take it.  Now look at what Chester has left behind--particularly the notebook.  Read it.  Now take it.  Now get out of there, and wait for the police to show up.

You'll figure out that Chester has opportunistically framed you for the explosion--you would have been accused whether you set the bomb or not.  His diary is your proof that he set that bomb, intending for it to go off after the first ride on the Blocker.  With his diary in hand, you'll be exonerated for this felony, and let go, with your Yellow and Blue Shirts.  But if you have the nametag on you--Walter's--they will arrest you and put you in jail for the destruction of the other building (unless you've already gotten yourself arrested--if so, and you 'got results', skip ahead to NAP TIME.  Otherwise, read on).

On the other hand, if you don't have the diary, the game will end with you being thrown into the Big Clink--not the one at the police station.

THE DRUNK TANK

Yep, you're in the 'pokey'.  Walter has got his revenge.  There's nothing you can do here, essentially, except talk--but you have another 20 moves to do it in.  Get a look at your cell mates.  You'll find that only one is really sleeping.  Look at the one in the blue jacket.  He's lying awake.  Look at his jacket.  You may wonder why he is clutching his jacket and shaking.  Is it DTs??  ASK BLUE MAN ABOUT ANXIETY.  He'll loosen up--then you get a surprise!  Your Green Shirt pops out!

But you won't be able to get it right away.  It seems to hold some meaning for him.  You'll need to verbally give him some proof that you should have the shirt.  TELL BLUE MAN ABOUT RED SHIRT(or any other shirt you've already gotten--you'll automatically tell him about Natalie and missing all of the shirts, etc).  How hard was that?  Now you can use the remaining time to get to know Bob and his friend, ask him some questions, about people and things, in the cell, etc.  When the time is up, you'll all be escorted out of the cell and back into town.  You'll see Bob and Roger again, in action, so to speak.

You can return to town by going north from here.  If you have all the shirts, read on from here.  If you got only the Green and Red Shirts, go back to JERRY AND THE WHITE SHIRT.  If you got only the Green, Red and White Shirts, go back to THE PARK.

If you have gotten all the shirts, you'll be prompted to go home and take a nap.  Follow the messages and clues once you get there.  This is where we segue into what is essentially Part II of the game.

NAP TIME

Go to Natalie's room and GET ON NATALIE'S BED, because you'll want to feel closer to her--and, you've always wanted to know how comfortable her bed is.  Read all the clues.  When you wake up, you'll see her diary(!) laying on the bed next to your head.  Don't worry, it'll disappear only if you try to take it while off of the bed, or if you take it and then leave the bed--and it will reappear when you get back on the bed.  The only thing you need it for is for a password, and how and where to use it.  So READ DIARY.  You'll only see the words inside the front cover--pay attention--the 'magic word' will be one of five possible words, all beginning with 'f'--fooble, forsnook, finsteeth, frotzle or frachet--it was chosen at random at the start of the game, so it can be different if you restart at this point--you will not be able to use one of these words, even if you make the right choice, by chance, without first seeing it in the diary--if you try, you'll get a snarky response (but try it anyway).  And take her advice--remember to 'whisper' it.

THE SECRET ALCOVE 

Where is the alcove?  It's not her Nook out in the Living Room.  Remember the closet?  You'll have to have the light on and go deeper inside it.  Now, WHISPER (the magic word you found in the diary).  Surprise!  Go into that area.  Now look around, do whatever you want, look at the cards, learn about tarot.  Pick up the card on top of the deck.  Look at the cards in the spread.  You don't have to do these things, but I encourage you to read and explore.  Really, the important thing here is the mojo.  In fact, while you are here, if you listen long enough, Natalie's voice will spell out your next mission--find her and bring her mojo to her!!  Take the mojo, then step back out.

THE INVITATION

As soon as you step back into her room, you'll hear something like an engine running outside, and knock at the door.  Answer it.  YOU got a package, for a change.  But also, the mail has arrived.  Take the black box, and then go check your mailbox.  You'll have to sift through the junk mail 3 times before finding the important thing--it's an invite to your boss's party--TODAY.  And you'll need to go in your dress shoes--which you haven't got yet (they're on the list!).  But you decide that they'll have to take you in your office shoes, so put them on.  Wonder what's in the box??  Open it and look into it!  AHH!  Natalie's been KIDNAPPED.  That is, if you haven't already figured this out.  You'll notice some other strange things about this box/sphere.  It seems to tug you in certain directions.  Follow that.  It'll take you down Lookout Avenue--and while you're going down there, feel free to explore and look at things.  You're going to be late, anyway, so take your time.  Examine Mabel Maybre's--your landlady's--mansion across the street from you, take a walk down the street, go on the south side.  Look at the end of the street, past your boss's house--particularly the property with the small house, fenced in.  Now go to the party...

THE PARTY

When you arrive, finally, you'll see most of your co-workers leaving--you don't need them.  Go up and knock on the door.  If you have your invitation--and the office shoes on--you'll be grudgingly admitted, don't worry, this is the only possible way to get in.  Now you can spend all the time you want talking--or trying to talk--to John, Rick, Scottie, look around, etc., but at one point Scottie will be prompted to leave, and John goes upstairs for a nap.  You can spend all the time you want doing whatever you want, but what you should do is first go into the dining room where Richard is, and read the note on the counter.  John found some shoes, and had them thrown to the dog.  Were they yours??  In any case, you feel resentful.

Indulge your curiosity.  When John went upstairs, he left the rope detached.  So go on up!  Don't worry, his wife cannot stay in one place very long, she won't catch you or notice you.  Follow the snoring.  Now you're in John's room.  Stay quiet.  Look in the closet--gotcha!  Look at things.  You'll need to take two things--really three--the key from the drawer in the nightstand, and John's shoes.  Yep, John's shoes.  Be quiet about it!

Now go back down and onto the patio.  What do we do with the shoes??  Remember the note on the counter??  Now do unto John as he has done unto whoever those shoes belonged to.  Could be you, maybe not.  But be careful not to throw them directly at Ruffy.  You see, the sphere is pulling towards the doghouse, and you want to go in there without Ruffy knowing.  So you want to distract him a little.  Is there a tree, or a fence, in the other direction??  THROW JOHN'S SHOES AT TREE, or THROW JOHN'S SHOES OVER SHORT FENCE.  He'll get right after them.

Now the party's over for you, you must now go into the doghouse--you can look around there if you want, but you have 5 moves to unlock the gate with the key you found in John's room--or face Ruffy.  Look at the 'mass' you find there--take it for the points.  Now go--go south, then take the curious object you find on the ground nearby.  You're now at the vacant property next door--if you explored around the Raditch House before you came to the party, you'll realize that this is the house that was fenced in.  The sphere tugs you strongly in this direction, then breaks from your grasp and busts against the cellar doors outside the house, as you approach.

Obviously, you should go down in there...

NATALIE...??

You find Natalie tied into a chair in this cellar.  But not too tightly, as you find out, if you try to cut her bonds--with the strange 'handle'--which is a switchblade (aren't they illegal now?).  You can take the bandanna out of her mouth, and then UNTIE NATALIE.  You'll find out that she's not too conversational--time is of the essence.  What was your mission?  To give her the mojo.  So do it!

But you just can't....

You can try.  In fact, you can try three times.  Or not.

Either way, about 15 or so moves after you free her, you'll find out that she's really...

MABEL!  Your landlady!  And she becomes a giant bird!

And that the small house and cellar were just a mirage!

Before you have any time to think, Mabel flies up and takes you with her.  Why couldn't she just take the mojo??  Because it would reject her grasp.  But there's something about it that she NEEDS, and it needs to be willingly given to her by its owner--which is the REAL Natalie.

LOCKED UP, AGAIN?

You wake up in a jail cell, tied--this time much more tightly--to a chair, bolted to the floor.  In a dark, mildewy jail cell underground.  You cannot do anything, you cannot get up.  But wait, what is that in your back pocket (assuming that you did pick up that strange 'handle' back at the vacant property?)??  Push the little button on the handle in the back pocket--it's a switchblade!  Cut the ropes with it.  Now you can get up--to find out that the cell door isn't locked.  You can now leave the cell and go west into the main area--but also collect all of your things from the dungeon alcove just beyond the cell.  Don't worry, all Mabel is interested in is the mojo, which you are still wearing because she cannot take it off of you.  Is this a dungeon, or is it a gym??  Because you see all this exercise equipment laying around.  You'll find out for sure about 15 moves from the time you entered the Exercise Room before Mabel comes down to toture you--and the game ends. Try some of it out, if you want, but what you want to do is open the 'steam bath' and pick up the alabaster key from the floor inside it.  You'll need it later.  If you want some laughs, SAVE your position, and try some of the other equipment!

Now what you have left to do, here, is leave through the hatch overhead.  Now you are at Base of Mountain--pick up the plastic stick that you find there, it's a phosphorescent light stick--BREAK STICK for a light source.  You'll need to go east over to the oak tree fast--you have 5 moves from the time you emerged from the hatch before Mabel spots you.  Once you get to the tree, you won't have to worry about Mabel again--for now.

NIGHTSCAPE

Now from Tree Base, the only way you can go is UP.  You can wear the light stick on your wrist, and put everything you have in your backpack, wear it, and then WEAR STAFF (in case you haven't yet found out, the staff can be slid through the straps and worn in this way).  Now go UP the tree.  You are immediately presented with three branches going in northerly directions--north, northeast and northwest.  Which one is correct??  You can try them if you want.  But look around.  There is a hollow behind you--look into it!  There, you find a leather whip!  Read the tag--'From the One That Got Away'.

Also, there's another branch--overhead.  SWING WHIP AT STRONG BRANCH.  Then SWING ON WHIP.  Bombs away!!

Your way from here is pretty well cut and dried--you're on the other side of the fence, so you can follow the path around the mountain, and then into the cave--which is a tunnel that goes into the heart of the mountian.  Now go into the door--after picking up the piece of paper lying there.  Now you are in a strange place...

BLACK AND WHITE

This is just an abstract piece of interactive fiction that I decided to write into the game...

Now you are in the center of a perfectly white room with a huge black dot--there is even a sign indicating where you are!  If that's not enough, the piece of paper you have also has a huge black dot--this is a map, of sorts, showing you where you are.  Again, you can walk around, examine, explore all you want.  Use the white key that you got from the exercise room to unlock the white door, go into the room with the desk and examine the huge book that you find there--it's a ponderous tome written by Rene Decartes.  What is perhaps his most famous saying?  'I think, therefore I am'.  So we come to the one thing you need to do here.  Think.  But you need to do this in the right place.  Go where you feel most 'centered'--on The Dot.  Now--guess.  

THINK.

ON THE MOUNTAIN

Now you are on the terrace near the top of North Mountain.  Don't worry about getting off the mountain or back where you were.  And don't worry--yet--about Mabel.  Examine the fire--what's in it?  You have about 5-7 moves to take your nametag from the flames.  That's the last thing on your list!  You get the points.  Put the nametag on, because it's an important identity symbol.  Now you can look around and examine things there on the terrace.  Specifically, examine the hole on the side--what do you notice just over the side, near the hole?  A cave entrance, on a lower level.  You'll need to get down there.  How?  It's a precarious climb, and there are no hand-holds.  Seven symbols of your identity will be needed to help you climb down there.  You're already wearing one--the nametag--as a sort of bolster to your courage.  Now, what do you have that can fit into the hole?

Your staff.  PUT STAFF IN HOLE.

Now, you're going to have to make a rope--with the remaining five things.

The shirts.  It doesn't matter what order you tie them in, you can do it this way--TIE RED SHIRT TO WHITE SHIRT.  TIE BLUE SHIRT TO SHORT ROPE.  TIE YELLOW SHIRT TO SHORT ROPE.  TIE GREEN SHIRT TO SHORT ROPE.  Or however.

Now you have a long rope.  Obivously, you can TIE ROPE TO STAFF.  Voila!

Remember to be wearing your nametag before you go.  Now, DOWN....

You are now in front of the cave entrance, on a narrow ledge.  The only way to go is into the entrance, south.

You find--NATALIE!--but she's lying down with her hands tied.  She notices you--listen to her--she IS the real Natalie.  Cut her bonds with the switchblade--you won't be able to untie the leather string.

Another surprise!  (And don't worry, you did everything correctly up to here.)

Now you have TWO Natalies!  Is this a good thing??  No, because one of them is Mabel!

Now ask either one of them anything!  Try anything!  Have fun!  You won't be able to tell which one is which, no matter what you do or ask--but listen to what they say.  The crucial thing is knowing which one to give the mojo to.  After about 20 moves from the time you freed the real Natalie, one of them will say something interesting.  Remember the 'magic word' from earlier?  She will say that word, to which the other will say 'Oh bullhockey, honey, don't listen to her!  She's nuts!'  Which ever one, the Natalie on the left, or the Natalie on the right, that said the 'magic word' is the one that you should give the mojo to!  (Like the magic word, which Natalie is the correct one is not necessarily the same in each complete game playing.)  Now watch the pyrotechnics!

GETTING HOME

Natalie has now flown you both back down to the ground, but beyond that point, she is not exactly going to hold your hand on the way home.  Really there is only one route you can go--she will not let you turn back.  Listen to her as you pass the Goblins, Inc. shop--an important suggestion.  You are now on Center Street--but now it's night time and you are heading south to the corner at Rex's--you've been here before, but just during the day when it wasn't so active.  Now turn west--you are now at the Alley Entrance, again.  You see two pairs of feet sticking out of the alley--EXAMINE FEET, for another surprise!  It's your two buddies from the jail cell!  Natalie looks none too patient, but she'll need to wait for a bit, because this is a very important encounter--a key conversation.  You have 20 moves to tell them about the right things.

They want to know how your quest is going.  Now TELL BOB ABOUT one of the following--Natalie, Mabel, the kidnapping, the shirts, the rescue.

Bob will then 'confer with his cohort' and in moments, this results in him donating their jackets to you and Natalie.  You get Bob's jacket, because, with your bald pate, you look more like him, and Natalie gets Roger's jacket--and she gets the fedora--with her hanging on your neck, this makes you two look like the two of them, with Bob toting Roger to their lodgings for the night, at the apartments.

Now all you have to do is get home.  Literally.  Continue west to Lookout Avenue Apartments, go south into the gate, and go back to the apartment.  Your disguise fools the giant bird hovering around the mountain to the north, until the hat blows off of Natalie--just as you get inside the gate.  Then Mabel spots her and as the two of you start running, the gate begins to close.  Crazy Mabel doesn't notice this, as intent as she is, and just as she swoops down, the gate closes!  Game over for her!

And for you.

Thank you for playing my game, and as the ending says, look out for 'Bullhockey 2!"
